The Vice President of the Republic of the Philippines. Honorable President of the Senate. Honorable Speaker of the Lower House. Honorable Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. Honorable members of the Philippine Congress. Honorable members of the Cabinet. Their excellencies of the diplomatic corps. Selected guests. My dear compatriots:

On May 11, more than 10 million Filipinos decided that we would lead the country, into the new millennium.

Now, they are asking, what will this new leadership do to lead our country into the new century?

Today, I stand before you with an accounting of the present and with a road map for our future.

How do we get through the crisis that has engulfed our economy?

Where are we now?

Where do we come from?

And where are we going?

I'm not going to mess around anymore. We are now in the face of a severe crisis that is raging across Asia.

According to experts, we are not yet in the worst phase of the crisis.

If we ignore where we are today, our country will surely sink under the weight of a complete recession.

Our economy is in dire straits, and the nation's coffers are at stake.

But that doesn’t mean the government can do nothing. And even more, it does not mean that the Filipino people can do nothing.

The people are fed up with meaningless promises and shows. In the face of the severe crisis we have gone through in the past year, we need quick and effective solutions. This is the great challenge we must address — all of us: the presidency, Congress, the private sector, the people. This is a daunting challenge — but I’m confident that our combined talent, diligence, and ability outweigh it.

But let us first make an accounting of the present. A true accounting that is perhaps long overdue.

In early 1998, gross domestic product [GDP] growth was only equivalent to 20 percent of the level recorded in 1997.

The production of our factories has halved. All our industries have done is reduce inventory — and not create products. In their fear of recession, the problem only exacerbated.

Our agricultural production has collapsed. The rice yield dropped by 14 percent, and the corn yield also dropped by 24 percent.

We often refer to the El Niño phenomenon, but the real root of the problem is the general agricultural sector.

Our inflation rate is almost double-digit. The interest rates charged by the banks are so high that many of our businessmen cannot get into debt. And banks have tightened their lending, so many goods are closing.

Due to devaluation and El Niño, our peso continues to fall. This is very heavy for our countrymen who have a beak, a beak of the past.

Unemployment is now 13.3 percent and still growing; underemployment, 20 percent and also growing. 4.3 million Filipinos need a job. Twice that number wish they had a real, full-time job.

It can be said that it is still small. But how do you tell a hungry family that other families in other countries are in a worse situation?

One lost job is one hungry family, and one cold statistic I cannot agree.

Statistics claim that the number of poor people has gone down in the past decade. I wonder if the people believe these statistics.

I don’t have those statistics. Poor is poor — no money, no food, no roof, no dignity, and most of all, no hope.

Not only that. ‘The rich get richer, and the poor get poorer.

I wish that I could say that we shall set up a job security fund soon. But I don’t want to add to the inventory of unfunded laws and bills that now amount to P400 billion worth of promises that will never be fulfilled.

According to statistics, in the past six years, as the Philippine economy grew, the richest 10 percent got 40 percent of the national income.

And the poorest 10 percent? Less than two percent.

It is worse in the countryside, where 40 percent of Filipinos still work for one-third of wages in the city. That is why they come here. Only to find that there are no jobs, or none for which they qualify.

that day, I thought that many foreign businessmen would come to our country voluntarily because our workers were talented and willing to accept low wages. This is no longer true.

The productivity of the average Filipino worker is very low because only half of them have graduated from primary school while only thirty -three percent have reached high school.

But the funds we can set aside for education are limited; we have a shortage of 24,000 classrooms, and 4,000 teachers.

Not just in the field of education — to date, over 30 percent of the nation's households still do not have access to electricity. And in the whole of Asia, our electricity bills are second only to Japan.

In the field of agrarian reform, which is now in its 26th year.

Only 57 percent of target areas have been distributed, while productivity has become lower.

This does not mean that the land should have been left with the landlords, but that the farmers should not have been left to fend for themselves.

This is where we are now. Add anarchy on the peace and order front, where the only thing organized is crime, and the only thing systematic is kidnapping. The result: capital flight. Yet some officials think they can attract foreign funds with tax incentives for potential kidnap victims.

Any new President has dreams and aspirations for the country, especially for me, which the Filipino masses have high expectations for. But even if I want to give their expectations as soon as possible, how can I give if we don’t have enough finances to spend to raise their livelihood?

We have a P70 billion budget deficit and a consolidated public sector deficit that could go as high as P90 billion. Collection of taxes and duties are down, even as more and more tax exemptions and incentives cut deep into government revenues.

Government could borrow more. But that will only raise interest rates and worsen the economic slowdown. The result: less taxes and fewer jobs.

If high interest rates squeeze GNP by just two percent more, there will be half a million more jobless. But if we pressure the Central Bank to print more money, inflation will shoot up.

Left and right, there are warts, it is very difficult to weigh, and we have a very serious problem. However, at the root of the problem is the solution I see.

The problems we face are of such magnitude as to require nothing less than heroic and concerted action. We must move upon them as a single community, bound together by common rules that we all agree to respect and obey.

To begin with, we have to reduce the cost of governance, costs that go higher and higher with each corrupt act, with each wasteful project.

Billions of pesos are being wasted on wasteful and useless projects, and even more is being lost like a bubble due to ongoing corruption.

Business pays taxes, but mostly into the pockets of BIR agents or customs examiners instead of the national treasury.

In 1998 alone, we can save as much as P34 billion from pork barrel.

P4.6 billion went to the centennial celebration, but the Department of Social Welfare had to beg for P100 million in emergency food aid to drought victims in Mindanao, and did not get it.


The 1997 World Development Report ranks the Philippine Civil Service as among the most politicized in the world, with politics deciding appointments down to janitor. The 1992 Corruption Index ranked the Philippines as the second most corrupt country in the region.

Debt service took 27 percent of the national budget last year; P26.4 billion in the first semester of 1998 alone. The total external debt, including the private sector, is $ 45.4 billion or P1.9 trillion pesos.

When I took office as President, I was surprised to be informed that the total debt of the public sector had reached P2.3 trillion.

Not billions are being talked about now, but trillions.

We know where we are: in an economic slowdown, deep in the Asian crisis.

We know that we don’t have much to work with.

Previous leaders have laid down both political and economic reforms that make up an enduring framework from which we can further build.

But we race against time, as an impatient public ask us: When will those reforms pay dividends for the common man?

Well, we just have to begin now. With honesty, with thrift, with efficiency.

Passing is enough.

The robbery is enough.

That's enough waste.

The shows are enough.

We need to stretch the seeds, and real service should be the framework for our solutions. [Applause]

This year, from the expected P93 billion, down to only P60 billion, the government needs to make corresponding changes and savings to further reduce its expected deficit to only P40 billion.

In order to achieve these targets, we will resolutely pursue several major cutbacks in expenditure programs.

First, I have instructed the secretary of the budget to continue to withhold 25 percent of budget allocations, excluding salaries and wages, from the various national agencies, including the Office of the President.

Second, we will continue to withhold 10 percent from the internal revenue allotment of the local government units [LGUs].

Third, I believe that congress shares my conviction that we have to abolish the pork barrel in the face of our fiscal position. [Applause] Few congressmen are applauding. [Laughter] Our people ask no less.

Lastly, I will postpone the implementation this year of various programs earmarked for funding from the military camp sale proceeds, including the AFP modernization program. [Applause]

We will also move quickly to dispose of the burden of government-owned corporations. I urge Congress to prioritize the bill privatizing the NAPOCOR within the first three months of the 11th session. Privatization of government shares in Pasar, Philphos, Petron, FTI, PNB, PNOC-EDC, PNCC, Meralco, and the two government-owned television stations will commence this year. The Department of Finance will put in place, within 100 days, a program to spin off or restructure the rest of the government corporations. But government hospitals we will never sell. [Applause] And our government will continue to support it.


All dealings, contracts, and negotiations will be done with complete transparency and integrity, every step of the way. [Applause]

Any indication of anomaly, I will immediately cancel the sale.

I repeat, just one news about corruption, I will stop any kind of auction. Whoever they are. [Applause]

I have ordered an inventory of all government lands titled to departments and bureaus and their transfer to the national government. I want my officials to keep out of the real estate business and stick to public service. [Applause]

But let us not forget that privatization is mainly an emergency response to an emergency situation.

It is therefore my intention to initiate institutional reform of the entire budget process. My administration has just completed its first three-year budget framework, which the national government will soon propose to Congress as our budget accord. In contrast to the current practice where only the executive decides on the initial list of programs and projects, the budget accord will involve both Congress and the executive in the selection of projects to be approved by the President. And the total of these expenditures cannot exceed predetermined, irrevocable ceilings over the three-year period. [Applause]

On the financial side, I hope that the action plan of the Department of Finance will succeed in making tax collection effective.

The action plan of the Department of Finance will start with an asset census, intended to establish an up-to-date and reliable database on the net worth of all tax-paying Filipinos.


We will push for a tax amnesty that will give peace of mind to delinquent taxpayers and tax credits to honest ones. After the tax amnesty, I will assure you that we will apply the full force of the law against tax evaders. [Applause]

I assure you that we will not only pursue these tax evaders but will definitely be punished, whoever they are. [Applause]

We will establish a large taxpayers unit at the BIR. We will suspend the implementation of certain BOI exemptions granted to companies under laws and executive orders that expired in 1997. [Applause]

The fiscal reforms forced upon us by the economic crisis will continue to serve us well even after the crisis is over. I will take this opportunity to establish fiscal discipline in the spending habits of government. Although we have to tolerate a certain amount of deficit this year, we will try as best as possible to pursue a balanced budget for the national government in the coming years. The consolidated deficit for the entire public sector will be limited to no more than 1 percent of the country’s GNP.

Everyone will benefit from what we do: Not just the government, but the common people as well.

In the field of our financial system, my administration will continue to respect the independence of our Monetary Board and the Central Bank of the Philippines.

But trade does not have to suffer greatly from rising interest rates.

I am in favor of lowering interest rates and speeding up the flow of finance, especially in small businesses. However, I will make sure that the money of government financial institutions [GFIs] is not squandered by a few corporations.

Giant corporations and powerful groups have cornered a huge chunk of the resources of government banks, whose mandate is principally to help agriculture and small and medium enterprises.

This practice will be reversed. Their exploitation is too much. These billionaires have pushed small borrowers to lending windows that charge much higher interest rates. From this time on, GFIs will truly, sincerely, service the common people’s needs. [Applause]

The current crisis has also exposed the danger of over-reliance on outside funds, so we need to increase our own savings, when we have our own investment in our projects.

We are on the side of agriculture, which has been severely neglected, so the food security of 70 million Filipinos is on the brink of uncertainty.

The monopoly of rice importation by the National Food Authority has not stabilized prices, nor has it broken the cartels. Two administrations have declared sugar a sunset industry, doomed to die. Maybe. All I know is that, sunset industry or not, I cannot leave three million families who depend on sugar in the dark, with nothing to eat after the sun goes down.

Perhaps the sinking of our agriculture is caused by lack of infrastructure. There are not enough lanes connecting farms and markets.

Why plant if you can't sell your harvest?

We are condoning irrigation fees. We will provide irrigation to our farmers for free. [Applause] At the same time, we will launch a full-scale program based on cost-effective irrigation technologies.

We need to build 140,000 kilometers of new roads. It will cost P484 billion.

Without graft and corruption, this will be money well spent. It could also jumpstart the economy.

As for our environment, we will implement a total log ban. [Applause] We're going to launch a new tree replanting program. But not like in the past when massive reforestation was another excuse for massive corruption.

Traffic tells us that we need more roads and we need to finish them faster. One reason for delay of roads and other projects is the issuance of temporary restraining orders or TROs. I will not interfere with the judiciary, but I urge the Supreme Court to remind judges of the lawyer’s oath to delay no man for money.

The sale of the temporary restraining order is too gross. [Applause]

The poor have no strength to help themselves, but now, even the government is short of funding. So we must strategize to maximize.

Dole-outs are out, but basic social services are only just and right. That means basic health care, basic nutrition, and useful education for those who want it but cannot afford it.

We will speed up the program to establish one science high school in every province. [Applause] We will give education subsidies straight to deserving students and teachers without passing through the schools. That way they can choose where to study and where to teach.

They all need money. In the next steps, we just need courage and political will. I have already signed the executive order creating the so -called Presidential Task Force against Organized Crime. As a result, I was met with severe criticism.

One question, one answer: Are we against crime, or are we against crime? The task force is what I think is needed to hit crime, and hit it hard so as to put it out — decisively. [Applause] Maybe there is a better way, but no one has shown me this. They only say that I am wrong but not how I can do it right and effectively.

I'm tired of them. As well as the people, tired as well. Tired of pure politics. Tired of pure words, but can do nothing but insult those who fight crime. My decision is complete. The presidential task force against the criminals continues.

I propose that Congress amends the Dangerous Drug Act to eliminate the possibility of probation for all offenders. Even if they say they are sorry. The only place for a drug dealer and the addict is together in jail.

I shall propose another controversial measure. I want to devolve greater administrative control over the Philippine National Police to the local government units. [Applause] I am sure I will get hit for this also. Perhaps there is a constitutional question here. But one thing is sure, I am not abusing power. What I am doing is sharing some of my power with the local executives over the national police.


The hard-working police do not shy away from the temptation to abuse. But I have no doubt that the disciples of the law will faithfully perform their duty no matter how difficult they may be.

But why should we make their situation worse? I believe that when our law enforcement officers are paid enough, our police will be more professional.

In crime, our answer is punishment. In rebellion, our response is negotiation.

To those who revolt, is only sincere desire to achieve social change, we are willing to negotiate.

But with terrorists, we have no time.

To our Muslim brothers and sisters, I ask for the opportunity to bring justice to so many years of neglect. Let us stop the violence, and increase the covenant brotherhood. As we continue to uphold the rights of our women.

As President, I inherit not only the problems but the responsibility to finish what my predecessors have started. That includes the resolution of ill-gotten wealth cases from the Marcos era. [Applause] I will do so. We have talked of settlements but we have not precluded continuing prosecution.

Yet these cases have gone on long enough. Therefore, I order the Presidential Commission on Good Government to go forward on all ill-gotten wealth cases with all the evidence it has taken 12 long years to collect.

No more delays.

One way or another, I want these cases to end in one year, in final judgments or acceptable settlements.

After 12 years, perhaps there is evidence to give justice to the Filipino people. This is the clear example of justice delayed, justice denied.

With great external security as well. Effective national defense requires not just modern weaponry but better fighting men. Before we spend on expensive hardware, let us have the right kind of soldiers. It is not weapons that win wars but the men who fight them.

Until we develop a credible military deterrent, we must depend on the goodwill of our neighbors, on our treaty commitments with the United States, and on the skills of our diplomats in conveying to everyone that we want only peace, stability, and a shared prosperity .

It is said that my stand as a senator against the U.S. Bases Treaty disqualifies me as President from endorsing the Visiting Forces Agreement with the United States.

On the contrary, because I stood up for Philippine sovereignty in 1991, now as your President, I have the moral right to stand up for Philippine security today. [Applause]

On the governance side, the government was established to serve the people — and not itself. After all, we need more governance — especially to promote the welfare of the poor.

Today, our governance is excessive, but public services are sorely lacking.

I will ask Congress to give me the power to reorganize the government so that it is economical and prudent. The aim is not to change officials but to rationalize government operations. We are a small country, we should only have a small government. Not only on the national but also on the local level.

As for our electoral reforms, we need not only peaceful elections, but a less expensive campaign. We must not only ensure the right of citizens to vote; we must make sure their votes are counted.

To achieve this, the Election Commission needs to be given more power to block and punish all forms of fraud. I urge Congress to enact legislation to make any electoral fraud a heinous crime. [Applause] The computerization program must be completed before the next election. I am sure we can still do much to improve government administration — but some constitutional rules may still need to be changed. The time will come for change in our Constitution.

Honorable representatives of the Filipino people: Let me end this message by expressing a sincere hope.

This year — despite serious problems — our economy is still moving forward.

This year, despite formidable odds, we still expect some economic growth. Our gross national product is targeted to expand this year by 2 to 3 percent. While other countries in the region have registered negative GNP, we continue to have positive growth — this, I would say, is a credit to my predecessor, Former President Ramos. [Applause] We believe we can keep inflation based on 1998 prices in the single digits, at around 9.5 percent.


To conclude, my aim is to help our country escape the recession. My solutions are obvious, my proposals may be commonplace, but they were never adapted before.

In sum, they are to spend wisely and less. And by austerity and hard work generate the means to cover the shortfalls of the past, so we can have a smooth runway for a final takeoff.

Perhaps by then, six years will have passed, and someone else will take over as pilot. I am honored enough to be elected to the position of the highest responsibility, power, and trust in the land.

I have neither pretensions nor further ambition, only the sincere desire to serve, to help the least of our people. [Applause] That is why I ask for a little understanding, a little time, a little patience for the sake of our people, and above all for the sake of our many poor people.

I believe that when we are able to be united, we are together, we can overcome all kinds of trials. There is also our challenge; there is also our success.

Thank you very much.
