

Kindly sit down. Thank you for your courtesy.

When I was a member of Congress, I —- my seat was over there. The seat… The lady with a violent – — not violent but rather violet dress — seated. But I was always absent together with the Speaker and Tonyboy Floirendo, who is still absent until today. [laughter] And that started… Ay is he there? Sorry. But his propensity started almost 17 years ago when we were members of the 11th Congress.

Senate President Aquilino Pimentel III and the members of the Senate; Pantaleon Alvarez, the Speaker and the members of the House of Representatives; Vice President Maria Leonor Robredo; Former Presidents Fidel Ramos, Joseph Estrada, and former President Gloria Arroyo; Chief Justice Maria Lourdes Sereno of the Supreme Court and the members of courts; Archbishop Pinto and the distinguished guests of the diplomatic corps; Secretary Salvador Medialdea and the members of the Cabinet; my fellow workers in government; my countrymen.

When I took my oath of office a year or so ago, I knew that our country was reeling from a multitude of problems. That day, there was euphoria in the air resulting from a successful campaign and the thought that dominated my being was to make good on my promise to the people to bring [about change] — change in government, not a change that is passing but a change that can survive the test of time.

Although I still had to know the magnitude and gravity of the problems, my feeling then was that, equipped with political will and braced by a concerned citizenry, those problems would eventually be bested by us. It was only a matter of determination and collective action. It was only a question of time.

For as I saw it then as I see it now, there is no problem in the world which can stop the march of a people with unflinching and tenacious determination. That was how euphoric — euphoric it has been.

Early on, I felt that if change was to be meaningful, it had to start with those occupying the highest positions in government because change that comes from below is more transitory than permanent. And I was aiming for permanence. Let change trickle down from [top to] bottom.

It has to be a change that is not confined merely to the replacement of people by people, but a change in the people‘s attitude, disposition and work ethic.

Sadly, although we knew years ago that what was needed or ought to do, we did not do [them] because our idea of government was parochial and we could not rise above family, ethnic and clan loyalties as well as loyalty to friends and co-workers. No one wanted to be a snitch. That is why we are one in saying that genuine change is what this country truly needs.

I believed then, as I believe still, that progress and development will sputter if criminals, illegal drugs, illegal users of drugs are allowed to roam the streets freely, victimizing seeming with impunity, the innocent and the helpless. Worse yet, there were times in the past when the protectors of the people were themselves the perpetrators of the very crimes they were tasked to prevent or suppress. It is ironic as it is madness.

I have learned that economy surges only when there is peace and order prevailing in places where investors can pour [in] their capital and expertise. I have learned from my experience in Davao City that investor confidence [is] bolstered and fortified only if a potent force and mechanism for [the] protection of local and foreign investments are in place.

That is why, I have resolved that no matter how long it takes, the fight against illegal drugs will continue because that is the root cause of so much evil and so much suffering that weakens the social fabric and deters foreign investments from pouring in. The fight will be unremitting as it will be unrelenting.

Despite international and local pressures, the fight will not stop until those who deal in it understand that they have to cease, they have to stop because the alternatives are either jail or hell. And I will make sure, very sure that they will not have the luxury of enjoying the benefits of their greed and madness.

I do not intend to loosen the leash in the campaign or lose the fight against illegal drugs. Neither do I intend to preside over the destruction of the Filipino youth by being timid and tentative in my decisions and actions. 

To the critics against this fight, your efforts will be better spent if you use the influence, moral authority and ascendancy of your organizations over your respective sectors to educate the people on the evils of illegal drugs instead of condemning the authorities and unjustly blaming for every killing that bloodies this country.

But don‘t get me wrong. I value human life the way I value mine. Each life that is snuffed out translates into future generations lost. It is like cracking the acorn from which an oak tree grows
– which, in turn, produce the seeds to complete the cycle of [life in] perpetuity.

There is a jungle out there. There are beasts and vultures preying on the helpless, the innocent [and] the unsuspecting. I will not allow the ruin of the youth, the disintegration of families and the retrogression of communities, forced by criminals whose greed for money is as insatiable as it is devoid of moral purpose. Neither will I be immobilized into inaction by the fear that I will commit an act that will expose me to public condemnation or legal prosecution. You harm the children in whose hands the future of this Republic is entrusted, and I will hound you to the very gates of hell. 

That is why I ask you to join me in this fight against illegal drugs and all forms of criminality.

The government, equipped with legal authority, and you, with the moral ascendancy over the sector you represent, can do so much, and hopefully eradicate this social scourge that plagues us no end.

Look beyond your biases, your prejudices, your ambition [and] your political agenda. The search for change will begin and end only when we look into ourselves and find it within.

Today, a multitude of problems confront us. No sooner is one problem solved [when] another surges forth in its place. But we will not be disheartened; we will not be cowed; we will not be overwhelmed.

It is during trying times and troubled events that the resilience, perseverance and determination of the people are tested. The Filipino is no stranger or neophyte to situations like the one we face today. We can, and we will, overcome as we did countless times in the past, [but] only if we work together towards a common goal.

Sad to say, despite all efforts, peace, especially in the Island of Mindanao, continues to elude us. But of course, it is not the peace of the dead but the peace of the living that we seek. Peace flits away like a butterfly when you try to snatch it by the wings. And our pursuit of peace continues.

The red insurgency has been with us for decades; the Muslim issue, for centuries.

So much time has lapsed, so many lives have been lost and so much destruction has been wrought but peace eludes us still. Sometimes I am almost tempted to conclude that peace might not be able to come during our lifetime.

But believe me, it will not be for want of trying. And I will persist in our goal of attaining peace [up] to the last day of this administration and maybe even beyond although in a different capacity. [applause]

There is rebellion in Mindanao. The extremists have declared it their purpose to establish a caliphate within Philippine territory along the teachings and beliefs of [the] Islamic State of Iraq and Syria or otherwise known as ISIS. The battle of Marawi has dealt a terrible blow to our quest for peace especially now that an alien ideology and a radical shift in purpose have been injected into the local setting.

I declared Martial Law in Mindanao because I believed that that was the fastest way to quell the rebellion at the least cost of lives and properties. [applause] At the same time, the government would be adequately equipped with the constitutional tool not only to prevent the escape of rebels who can easily mingle and pretend to be civilian evacuees only to re-group in another place to fight another day, but also to prevent them from spreading their gospel of hate and violence in the rest of Mindanao.

Martial Law and the suspension of the Writ of Habeas Corpus enable the military to arrest, detain and question suspected members and sympathizers of the rebellion similar to what happened to the parents of the Maute brothers.

As president, I am reiterating my unwavering support and commitment to the soldiers of our Armed Forces and the members of our police force — those who are on the ground and in the battlefields and those who are risking their lives for our country and our democracy. I have your backs. To those who oppose and think that all these efforts are out of order, I hold myself — me and me alone should be responsible. 

The people of Marawi need help. Caught in the crossfire between government troops and Muslim extremists, they have been through hell and we need to help them rise and move forward.

If we cannot provide for the poor and the needy who are many, then we will not be able to keep from harm the rich who are few.

At the vanguard of our struggle for peace and order are our Armed Forces and Police. They are the silent heroes who risk their lives everyday for our country‘s security. In recognition of their valor, we have crafted a program to provide them with comprehensive social assistance, including financial, should they meet harm in the performance of their duty. For the family left behind by those who fell or are rendered totally disabled in the line of duty, we shall provide shelter, health care assistance, education, and employment. That is my way of telling our troops: never fear, do your duty. I stand behind you. So does this government and all its agencies. 

To decisively address insurgency and terrorism, we are working doubly hard towards [achieving] a stronger and more credible national defense system for the country. We continue to strengthen the defense capability of the AFP as a deterrence against terrorists, lawless elements, and other threats.

My fellow citizens, what I have said so far about the events in Marawi and its neighboring environs is only a part of a looming problem, which will cut across all classes and all sectors of society and eventually affect the entire country from north to south, from east to west, given the fact that Mindanao supplies a great part of our country‘s food requirements. I refer to climate change, which could bring drought and long dry spells affecting food production in Mindanao, given the fact that Mindanao is unusually warming. I ask all agencies involved in food production to look into this and act accordingly.

Also, I am appealing to all our legislators to immediately pass the National Land Use Act or NALUA [applause] to ensure the rational and sustainable use of our land and our physical resources, given the competing needs of food security, housing, businesses and environmental conservation.

Ours is a rich country. Wealth that this country is endowed with [is] a gift from God to be utilized for the [people‘s] welfare and the common good. I do not believe that this gift was given to us to be merely viewed or appreciated, but to be extracted from the earth and utilized to make life worth living.

That is why I say that it is not enough that we mine this wealth. What is more important is that we convert the raw material thereof into finished products for international and local purposes.[applause] That way, it will not only be the few who are the rich but also the poor who are many who will benefit therefrom.

Therefore, I call on our industrialists, investors [and] commercial barons to put up factories and manufacturing establishments right here in the Philippines to process our raw materials into finished products. [applause]

At this point in my administration, if possible, we shall put a stop to the extraction and exportation of our mineral resources to foreign nations [applause] for processing abroad and

importing them back to the Philippines in the form of consumer goods at prices twice or thrice the value of the original raw materials foreign corporations pay for them.

However, in the extraction and utilization of these resources, extreme care must be exercised [applause] that we do not recklessly and needlessly harm the environment. [applause] Responsible, regulated and sustainable development is what we advocate and require. The protection of the environment must be made a priority[applause] ahead of mining and all other activities that adversely affect one way or another. And this policy is non-negotiable.

I sternly warn… I am warning all mining operations and contractors to refrain from the unbridled and irresponsible destruction of our watersheds, forests, and aquatic resources. You have gained much from mining, we only get about 70 billion a year, but you have considerably neglected your responsibility to protect and preserve — and even the tax, it‘s about five percent

— environment for posterity.

I am holding all mining companies and its officials responsible for the full and quick clean-up, restoration [and] rehabilitation of all areas damaged by mining activities, and the extension of all necessary support to the communities that have suffered mining‘s disastrous effects on their health, [applause] livelihood, and environment, among others.

This is how it is. I left that. My eyes will hurt with that expletive
You know, you have the mining. I have to grant you a mining because you have complied with all the requirements of the law. And I cannot… I‘d be subject to a mandamus if everything is perfect and you have every right to mine. But in doing so, you destroy the rivers, you destroy the streams, from which the poor people fish — halwan or mudfish — and that is protein for the day for them.

now you will see that Gina Lopez gave you a clear picture of what was happening horrendously. You saw with ted failon, I really watched him, twice. And I realized that I have to do something about it as a Filipino. [applause]

You know, okay na ̳yung mining. you are only a Subsidiary of another giant corporation or you‘re a sister company of a telecommunication, you won't starve. But look at the picture shown to you. For once, they behaved correctly, ABS-CBN. Watch the movie of Ted Failon. I salute him for coming with it. [applause]

You see the rice paddies. the rice paddies are dry and the soil is cracking. So the farmers cannot eat anymore. They are reduced to the garbage of what you can get there, salvage anything and sell it to the scrap. That is what happened to the Pilipino. You are not my enemy. As a matter of fact, you give government almost 70 billion. But that is still small.

Now, you see these rice fields drying up and the rivers without fish. The only source of protein. You can't go hunting. You see an eagle there, shoot it, you're a prisoner. Feed ̳yung… Where do you feed…?

Try to go out, let's go - you're with me. And try to see how hard it is for them to survive. Now this is… You want this to happen, after all ̳ your money is too much, adre, really. I'm a mayor, I can look at your corporate earnings, your sister company, I can pierce the corporate identity, you too. And even there in the newspapers. When you are not supposed

Filipino. And yet when you start to pierce their identity, it is fully owned by Americans. That's what happened. It’s just a matter of piercing the…

So I don't have much ABS, are you a Rappler? Have you tried to pierce your identity and it will lead you to America? Do you know that? And yet the constitution requires you to be 100 percent - media - Filipino. Rappler, try to pierce the identity and you will end up American ownership. You are rich, mining companies. This is my deal with you, either I will raise the taxes, I will reserve the profits to compensate for those who are suffering and in agony. [applause]

You have to come up with a substitute, either spend to restore the virginity of their source or I will tax you to death. [Applause] Because I will get the taxes, I will really pour. Now, if you can make an arrangement, an inventory of the-̳yung the people were broken, even the river starved. You know guys,  you from-Davao we are not new to it, you want to see horror in your lifetime? I'll take care of it. NPA, don't pretend there first, fight because we will go with them. You stop your


- you are all proud there. Let's go to Diwalwal, there [inaudible] and I will show you the river. Up there at the source, it’s so pristine. But there in - right at the start of the boundary where the millings are started, the water there is not clear, it is not brown, it is black. Your one peso will win one million from me if I am lying. If you want I will take you there tomorrow. Now, if the expletive NPAs target us, that's our problem, that's all.

We're just together. The presidency is vacant, the Senate and the congressman are vacant. The truth is, you should visit the… Even the first spade, even the first spade full of earth that you extract and throw it away of no use. Just put it there because it’s an open pit, you dig and dig and dig, is already the first spade there is the decreasing of Mother Earth.

You know another mining rage?  Speaker. He comes from a mining town but he hates mining. I am my friends ̳the others, ̳my classmates are vice presidents of mining, let them come here… But it reduces into something - the damage that you have caused. It’s not about our friendship. It’s not about years of being in the same room. It’s not about being fraternity brothers. But it is something that… [raises his right hand]

You know ̳yung martial law, I am not so much endeavored there tell me not to give? It's OK. I have no problem with that. Maybe you say that's right? It's OK. Then I will still fight. The way I will fight the war. If it is not acceptable to the normal of civilian conduct, then I am sorry because I am not fighting a civilian war, I am stopping violence and rebellion. [Applause] 

Whether you give or not, for me nothing. Because I, I do not intend to go beyond my term. As a matter of fact, I prefer to shoot myself right there in the back. Eh I'm not very fond of this job? I thought I was moving. When I come ah l expletive , headache. [applause]

True. You are listening. I didn't sign one, expletive ̳that's for food. Food at the office, you pay for that. I will go out. I do not collect anything. I do not remember. I do not sign anything there until now. I have no allowance I do not receive everything except my salary. Then two more families split up. What's wrong with that? [applause and cheers] All right, you wings there. All of us. [laughter] I can count my… Not even the two hands, only one hand that is exempted from that rule. Two, three, four, five. Fool me, why should we fool? Just because this is Congress it has

to be a secret, secret. Do you believe them? We’re all the same with that. Don’t even laugh pretend. [laughter and applause]

So I will increase the taxes. Then I will think of something that will compensate or make up for the damage or at least the income restored. Otherwise, I’ll have to stop mining. I will ask you to stop it. It’s not good. We are a small group of islands, not many. The coastal, many
, but we are in a contiguous territory, maliit lang tayo.
You must remember that there are so many billions of the future generations waiting in this stratosphere. What you want so that you don't feel sorry, you stop what. Then let us go to… Because this will not end here. How about the billions and billions and billions of
Filipinos who will come after us? Pity. They’ll have to scratch Mother Earth to eat. By
this time if there is no upheaval, no regeneration will occur, we are almost like we are really doing the - they only get a little. But have mercy. You'll see
̳Your grandson if you're just like that… If you're just like that ̳your - embrace ̳your grandson with a second wife. ̳The same one. ̳Isn’t it? ̳Isn't it, sir? [Laughter] Punch us there now, you liar.

Finally, let me make this appeal to those directly engaged in mining. Declare your correct income [and] pay your correct taxes. Believe me, your failure to do so will be your undoing and eventual ruin. [applause]

I can't run anymore, I'm old. I don’t think I’ll even survive the five years. But when I say humiliate you, I really humiliate you.

To our employees and officials of the LGUs tasked with monitoring these mining operations within their territorial jurisdictions, do your job without fear or favor. I [hold] you absolutely responsible for any misdeed or failure [by] the mining entities to comply — do not comply or comply with the guidelines, rules and regulations governing mining operations and activities within your area of responsibility. I mean it. Do not try to test my resolve. Absolutely I have nothing to lose except my life.

While we can control the acts of man, no one can control [or] stop the fury and rampage of weather gone wild. When nature fights back, it does so with a vengeance.

We have seen the terrible toll that Super typhoon Yolanda and the succeeding typhoons exacted in terms of human life and property. And we still have to recover from the beating that we got both during and in the aftermath of those mega-typhoons.

Aside from droughts, tempests and other problems taking shape which, according to DOST- PHIVOLCS — it is no longer just a distant possibility but a probability: Earthquakes.

The series of damaging quakes in Leyte, Surigao and nearby provinces and islands attest to this. We were told that it is no longer a question of ―ifǁ but a matter of ―when.ǁ

Thus, we need to act decisively and fast because the threat is huge, real and imminent.

Come to think of it really, they say that there is no perfect instrument or human acumen can really predict earthquake. I hope it will not come. Because when the "Big One" comes, I

hope it will be just in the mountains and in the rural areas. Because if it’s right - say

they are threatening the… Media because… Here in the speech, I reviewed it last night. I am calling [on] both houses of Congress to expeditiously craft a law establishing a new authority or department that is responsive to the prevailing 21st century conditions and empowered to best deliver [an] enhanced disaster resiliency and quick disaster response.

While the law is [being] crafted with extreme urgency, we need to undertake immediate action to ensure disaster resiliency and effective response in the greater [Metro] Manila area, which is our country‘s seat of governance, center of business, commerce, and the academe. Disaster resiliency of Metro Manila and the surrounding provinces is a matter of urgent [national ] concern.

That's here ̳that, they're scared here because of the high-rise buildings and… How many people live there? If… So so is it in a sinkhole? I mean if it cracks and it goes down, can we still manage to go up? God, not now because I'm here. Just wait, they're just here fighting.

I am directing the Cabinet Cluster on Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management to immediately work hand in hand with the concerned LGUs, the private sector and the affected communities themselves, in undertaking disaster [resiliency] measures, antidotes.

We all need to act fast.
With all the foregoing said, what then is the state of the nation today?

I will mince no words and neither will I window-dress the situation [that] we are in. Let me answer in two brief sentences. We are in — for trouble — because we live in troubled and uncertain times. And I fear that things might get worse before they become better. But like I said I hope we will cope, we hope and pray.

The West Philippine Sea issue and Federalism are matters that we have to tackle sooner or later.

On the other hand, despite our recent gains in improving the peace and order situation in the country, there is still so much to be desired and if we are to completely eradicate the menace of illegal drugs, criminality and corruption, we must do it.

I therefore ask Congress to act on all pending legislations to reimpose the death penalty on heinous crimes — especially on the trafficking of illegal drugs.

There is a shortage… No, no, no. There is a short clip of CNN about people in Massachusetts, was it there? Your clip they showed. Looked… Please just look… It’s repeated for almost every week I guess ̳the short clips. Look at the people there that they let go. They are there, they live under the bridge, they are getting thin, they are doing nothing. Nakaganun lang sila tapos po-pose ng ano… And they are aplenty there. They don’t work, nothing.


Then the UN said… Is he here? Are you there your UN representative? That you said that shabu will not affect the brain? Are you here? Raise your right hand, if you’re here. Do not worry. I will just… Do not - the word ―deludeǁ as into you… Iyong mga ano ninyo na - but we

know everyday that one family raped, two and all are dead. Then you trivialize it with human rights and due process. I'm okay with that. When you go into an anger, when you burst with rage, okay ̳yan. But with so many killings as brutal and as cruel as what happened, if you add human rights and due process, you stink and your mouth smells. If you want to criticize, criticize, condemn the act, stop there. But don’t give the excuse or don’t make it trivial by saying human rights at least we’ll be protected… That’s the most ***** a person can do. When you criticize, stick on one topic. Then you find an event where you can talk about human rights and due process, but do not talk about it in the same time when there is a carnage and you begin to blabber, talk about human rights. The man gets angrier. Eh p ****** i ** mo. Someone died there, imagine who you are. [applause] What have you done in the name of human rights? Seventy-seven-you have the records. You can summon the police. Seventy- seven before I became president. All drug- related, 77,000. And you trivialize that with a conference.
- just imagine…

I challenge you, you want a debate in public? Okay, we’ll have it. I will challenge you how also you trivialize the thing by - ̳you gave importance to De Lima. You all know, you were all here. You conducted the investigation. You heard the witnesses. You saw the videos. Is she a credible woman? Can she be a moral person? [applause] You're pure drama there in…

When you talk about an incident, talk about it, then condemn, condemn the police. But do not connect it with due process and human rights.  you look like a fool sa in front of the Filipino. You know why I get this rating? I could not be brighter than you and my work is not more important or your vocation is not less than mine. But when you talk in public carry the proper message. 

So you're 82 or so you're bombing me like that. People will say, ―That's right. That's right Duterte.ǁ Because it's happening. Eh, even if you are the front in that way, eh ̳when someone dies there in a massacre, women are raped, children, you don't say a word. [applause] Soon after the arrival of the-[applause and cheers] when these supposed Western experts arrive, you give them so much premium and importance. Where is your brain? Why are you all over there in white? Look at the white, Obama era, first ̳yung spokesman of the State Department. Imagine who. They thought they were even brighter than me. Then the staff of the President, then Obama. ―I would like to remind Mr. Duterte that the policy of… ǁ  When Trump arrived, ―Oh yes, Mr. President, I’ve been expecting your call. You are doing it all right… And this expletive… ǁ [applause] Uwi na ako. expletive ̳yan.

So? That’s the value of the country that you value. Ambivalent. like an electric fan. Okay here or not okay, it’s vacillating. You're done - you're moving. I really don't understand Filipino. It takes for an American to say that I’m a son of a expletive And it takes for an American to say, ―Oh you‘re great. You’re a hero in your country.ǁ Or where do I go here now? [laughter]

It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect our people from these crimes that have victimized… You know, don't scare me with his prisoner ̳yung international court of justice. expletive, I am willing to go to prison for the rest of my life. What is important to me is that I do what I want. [applause]

You know because in this country it is a rule of majority. I did it for the 50 plus one because in a vote of 100, I get 51, 50 plus one. Fifty is one-half, one, that is majority of one, I win. ̳Yung 49, ̳yon ̳yung mga… I don't have to make them happy. But when the time comes, eh if you look

me, I'm going to jail, don't worry about me. I can take it. When I was little, I went in and out of Pangilinan's law. I'm out of jail. Take it
The police record in Davao. Fear, ―He will be prosecuted.ǁ Hey, I'm a lawyer
because I will…

I said yes, everybody is entitled to come here and question me, but I have to question you also. And for good, let us make it official. We go to court and we tell the judge that we are hearing by an international body, can we have it judicially recorded? And I will place them under oath. I'll really catch them. I killed someone, that's right. When I was mayor, a little over… For 23 years I was mayor of Davao. You can see Davao now, you have been LGUs before. What city is now hitting nine percent growth? Eh we are still in Mindanao, we are still being bombed in Davao. Davao is nine growth. Then you say… Now, how do you turn nine ̳yung-show it nine we are about to hit six or so, they said. But
̳If you just let me, it will reach 21, the highest in the world. [applause] You're the only one holding back.

It is time for us to fulfill our mandate to protect… Tapos na ̳yan. Kindly… For so long… We have to act decisively on this contentious issue.

Capital punishment is not only about deterrence. It is also about retribution. Make no mistake about that.

I'm different. Let us understand each other including the international community. Our
- our criminal system uses the Revised Penal Code. That is a law that was given to us by the Spaniards, the original Revised Penal Code. Though it was translated into English and in this two books, three books, there are the definition of crimes and the penalties and everything. And the thrust of that Revised Penal Code, ladies and gentlemen, is the essence of retribution. That is why you have penalties. There is also the word ―positivist theoryǁ that you can nurture a criminal into goodness provided he goes to prison for two years, three years, he’s released, he’s a sex offender. When he goes out, he rapes again, kidnaps another girl and makes her a hostage for so many years. That's how you are. Admit it, that's how you are. You are so too lenient about this son of a expletive a human being that has a virulent brain and his enemy is society.

And many at times, there were sex offenders in America released only to rape and kidnap again and kill in just a few months after release. In the Philippines, it is really an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. You took a life then you must pay for life. That is the only way to even. You cannot place a premium on the human mind that he will go straight. Nobody can. Not even your best scientist. No one has ever fathomed how a person would react especially in committing crimes. That‘s the only way to do it to instill fear, that if you do it, you will die. That‘s the advantage of criminals and rebels and terrorists because they think that you are afraid to die.

That‘s why when I went to Marawi, I was asked by the media, ―Why are you here?ǁ ―I am here because my soldiers are here and I came here to die also.ǁ [applause] Because any battle, any fierce encounter, you have to be of equal equanimity. He wants to die, eh ̳I also want to die..

They say that they use the name of God, and the Christians say, ―we have the same thing.ǁ I read the Ecclesiastes 3. What does it say? Even during elections, there is a time to be great and a time for defeat. A time to be in the skies, emblazoned there and a time to be [inaudible] somebody. A time to have money, a time to be hard up. A time to just walk so many kilometers

to school and a time for graduation and being a lawyer. A time to be… I don‘t know what I am now. There ̳s always a time. [laughter and applause]

So I’ll match you. ̳When you say, ―I want to die.ǁ You are the son of… We are two. This bully, you know I had dinner with them in Bayan. This NDF because I used to be friends really with the NDF. I was crossing the ideological borders before. I was the one who entered the territory and we were really friends. But times have changed because God placed me here and I take care of a Republic. They said there ―bullyǁ I look like. T ******* pala kayo, talagang bully ako. [laughter and applause] P ***** i **. I am really a bully especially to the enemies of the state, I am really a bully. [applause]

Besides, I told the soldiers, ̳human rights are what, you are flying everywhere, anywhere ̳your brains. I said, ―Take no prisoners.ǁ Which is [garbled] - ―kill themǁ. Which is correct? But you don’t listen to my speech. This media - especially this ABS - just take ̳yang, ―kill them.ǁ [laughter]

̳That's your problem so I slapped you. There is no President who expletive  you because you are not behaving. Now you’re asking me for talks… [applause and cheers] When you publish in the newspaper or quote us in media, these reporters would only quote ―kill them.ǁ

I said, ―Kill them in a fight. If you have to shoot them, shoot them at the heart or the head.ǁ I said. Why? Because they will be detained here in Marawi, we will not be imprisoned. [laughter] now, and the courts will always insist that they will be - that’s the law - that they will be tried and detained in the place where they committed the crime. So don't really kill them, because let's put that in our barracks there, in our Mechanized Division. After that, take our cannon, they will fire at us. [laughter] A lot. How many jail - [what is it called?] - jailbreaks in Mindanao, in Cotabato alone? Six.

Cotabato City, four. The jail was there, raided and then released.

Do you know that? Because you do not publish. Or these people from Manila… Not you, you are bright, I love you. expletive . He said ―Why do you…? ǁ Why? What happened last April in Davao? It was bombed. How many were killed? Twenty-seven. A few years ago, the church was bombed twice. How many died? Fifty-nine. The airport just as the people were coming out of the departure - ah arrival - it was bombed. How many died? Thirty-two. In the war, three nuns were lining up there. I had to scoop the brain of the nun to put it in a can because the face was shattered. Zamboanga. And you say that the violation is only in Marawi? Clumsy. You really are… Let's talk now. I will take you there to the widows. When was that?

Don’t say ―It’s only in Marawi.ǁ Rebellion has been going on in Mindanao. No one is sanctified there. You just don’t read hard. What’s the ‘It’s very porous. If separate islands ̳yan, maybe. if it is separate ̳yan - very porous, they can go… And Mindanao - - this is not to… The Moro has nothing to do with it, we are the same. We are both Maranao, so just shut up. Don't… This is true.

There are many Muslims in Mindanao. All… Eh in Abra, there is eh. In this fight… Well, where do you think the Moro would side? If you kill. They will side with government? If I were now, if I lived, we wouldn’t have left - my mother wouldn’t have taken me outside. I’ll be a resident of Marawi, what do you think will be my sentiment? Sulu. Davao, purely Muslim enclaves ̳yan, there are enclaves, like villages. When the gunfire is sentimental, fire it all at once.

On another thing, I’ll talk it about in the conference. It's too much Left eh. You make a house - steal. I said to the soldier, ―Do not force the issue. I will just build yours. Just give it to me.ǁ

There is a project now, they want to take it again. Do not commit that mistake. Here and now, I will tell you, including the Congress of the Republic of the Philippines: You do anarchy, I will order the soldiers and the police to shoot. Even if I have to bury thousand of Filipinos.
Don't answer me.

Either you’re… Either… Let us understand this beginning today, either we have laws in this country or we do not. We enforce the laws against the miners and the rich, but I will also enforce laws against anarchy, disturbance, and create trouble. You too, are scared too. [applause]

Scare me to occupy the streets? Son of jueteng. You stay there, you ask for two days, I will give you six months. Don't leave there. Eat your own excrement there.

You scare the government. I’m sorry I’ve exceeded my time, but… Eh I have to say eh. For them to understand as well. After all, I'm just here in the media. Everyone listens too. You Leftists, I will not talk to you. Why should i? [applause] Don't force me to stand up pro-poor, shut up. Wait for two years, because I have…

You know, this is my proposal. I may be totally wrong and I will accept it, but this is mine. From now on, I will save money for the Armed Forces of the Philippines. We have lost so much soldiers. [Applause] And there are thousands already incapacitated to fight. Even my police, you ambush me every day. Even my convoy, because I was going to board there, they ambushed me.

Even me - expletive, me too, they kill. Anyway, I’m far from there. Pero convoy ko kasi ̳yun eh. I'm just waiting there for what… You know you used a machine gun. So just armorized.

You congressmen, senators you don't want - maybe you have an opponent. Is your roommate your wife now? [Laughter] Or did you kidnap her? You still armorize. True. Proven, M60. [Applause] Si… Si Senator Drilon, M60, sir. It can't really be removed. Because they closed it.
They just ruined ̳yung - di talaga nila. And the soldiers inside were all there all the time, mina- machine gun na, won't pierce

Mga expletive, pati ̳yung convoy ko, ambushin. They did not know that I had been speared. [applause] So you want me to talk, no, you're overreacting. You, Sison, tang… Drink Tang
The orange one. [laughter] You're old. You Philippines, listen, whole Philippines. You children, you Lumad natives, these old people, Sison is sick. I have colon cancer. Ang

cost of Norway, he surrendered. Because it became a political issue. This government who sponsored those - who provided the good offices. Will lose the election because of the issue there. Because the b **** s come back and forth, you tourists. Nothing to talk about.

When it comes to this, like this, like that, ah l *** mo. [Laughter] Don't tell the meaning to the guests. Am I exhausted? Really what am I, sir. Too demanding, you haven't even won an election once. You cannot even hang on into a

barangay. And you keep on killing people, not just the police, but also the civilians who don't want to join them.

So I said what - I really said, ―you're crazy.ǁ And I really said. Pardon pa si….expletive ko talaga siya the other day sa Davao. Who are you scaring? You are very old. And we all die. You who were left there on the road, you had better go home. You don't get anything out of the communist. [Applause]

Do you think that if the ISIS prevails in this country that you will have a place in their society? You must be awfully stupid, as stupid. [applause] You don't get anything. We are all involved. Thank you for allowing the exhaust here.
In our sustained effort to achieve just and lasting peace[laughter and applause]… Class, be courteous. Do not make a noise. The visitors are listening. [laughter] Just and lasting peace for a [unified] nation, we are pursuing an inclusive peace process, promoting the participation of all stakeholders, including those conflict-affected areas.

We took steps to promote inclusiveness in the Bangsamoro Transition Commission (BTC) by expanding its membership through Executive Order Number 8 which I signed in November last year.

By giving representation to indigenous peoples, women, children, and sultanates, and key stakeholders in the drafting of the Bangsa[moro] Basic Law, we ensure a Bangsamoro government that truly reflects the aspirations of our Muslim brothers and sisters as well as our indigenous brethren. [applause]

We have embarked on various initiatives to advance our national interest in the global community. We pursue good relations with all nations anchored on an independent — on an independent foreign policy [applause] — and the basic tenets of sovereign equality, mutual respect and non-interference. [applause]

As an independent nation, we will uphold and promote our national interests in the international community. We will strengthen and seek partnership with those who share our values. We will engage nations with full respect for the rule of law, sovereign equality, and again, non- interference. These are the principles that we are upholding as we advance to this year for the meeting as the Chair of the ASEAN.

We have cultivated warmer relations with China through bilateral dialogues and other mechanisms, leading to easing of tensions between the two countries and improved negotiating environment on the West Philippine Sea.

At this point, allow me to take a step back in time, in 1901. In 1901, there was known as Balangiga, and that is Eastern Samar. It was the time for Philippine-American War.

A combined group of Filipino villagers and guerrillas, in an effort to defend Samar Island from the alien invaders, attacked and overwhelmed a U.S. — a United States infantry garrison. Forty- eight American officers and men were slain in the attack. On the Filipino side, the casualty count was twenty-eight killed and twenty-two wounded.

In retaliation, U.S. gunboats and patrols were sent to Balangiga, Samar with the order to
―…make a desert of Balangigaǁ and to reduce Samar Island into an island of ―howling wilderness,ǁ where every male citizen from the age of ten and above, and capable of bearing arms, would be put to death. The Church bells of Balangiga were seized by the Americans as spoils of war.

Those bells are reminders of the gallantry and heroism of our forebears who resisted the American colonizers and sacrificed their lives in the process. Krag against bolo — krag was the standard rifle issued to the American troops. And that is how the historians describe.

[You go first, you go down. No, you go down, that goes up.] [Laughter] It's really hard if you're a director, you're still the speech. [Laughter] Many historians describe-[okay] the Philippine-American war. That is why I say today; give us back those Balangiga bells. [applause] They are ours.
They belong to the Philippines. [applause] They are part of our national heritage. [applause]
Give it back. That hurts us.

We now talk about our Overseas Filipinos. They are our heroes. They and their families have sacrificed much to the - for the country. We all know how a large part of our economic -economy comes from their remittances. That is why to ensure that their rights are protected, I ordered the increase of our assistance to the OFW from 400 million pesos to more than 1 billion. [applause]

We have been hard at work in securing the rights and welfare of our OFWs.

A year ago, I also warned government officials and employees that I will never tolerate corruption in my administration, not even a whiff of it. Let the dismissal of several high-ranking officials-whom I myself appointed-serve as a warning to all that I will never back down on my commitment to cleanse this government and corporation. [applause]

In order to bring government services closer to the people, we established hotlines [and] government centers that receive public concerns, one of which is the Hotline 911, which allowed us to receive and immediately respond to emergencies.

We also launched Hot - launched Hotline 8888, the Citizen’s Complaint Hotline. This is a public hotline facility that receives feedbacks or concerns on government services.

Since we launched this hotline, we have received numerous complaints from the public on government - slow government processing, unclear or changing procedures and requirements, centralized issuances of clearances and permits in Metro Manila and discourteous government employees, among others.

Time and again, ̳yung-̳yung pag-transact ng ordinaryo-no, the ordinary people who contract business in government. In the last ASEAN Ministerial Conference, I don’t know why Malacañang has to - my office has to do some work for - or the others, like these barongs. It’s always the - that outfit takes care of the attires that will be given to the ministerials, this time, to the heads of state.

You know, I’d like to address this myself to government. Is that to pay, you go back and forth man. Alam… I know that because I’ve been mayor for 23 years, I never allowed it in my city.

But here, you know the tailors there in Parañaque to Cavite - the tailors there - their only business involves boy scouts, teachers' uniforms, girl scouts, they are looking for contracts.

And they are just the — the stores that you find along the way until Cavite. They group together during times of ganito, may ASEAN. And they look for a person to represent them.

This is not — no offense intended but — usually, they look for beautiful women, young, who would do the talking, arrangement. You know, because it‘s the… Well, it‘s the reality of life, that the beautiful women get the attention always.

then when they deliver them you will ask them to return it. And right there in Malacañan, it happened. So, I will fire the lady, whoever was connected with her, as I have fired everybody else. A Cabinet member for buying an 18-million truck in Austria. That was not our contract. It was a contract of the previous administration. Fourteen of those 18 million were already delivered.

This Cabinet member was… I was informed about and I said the legal — his legal office — to stop
it. You know what? He went just right ahead, traveled there, signed something for the — another tranche of delivery. So right there at the meeting — right in the Cabinet meeting I said,
―Were you able to read the opinion of your law — your own law office?ǁ He said, ―No.ǁ But Sonny Dominguez was already passing to me the — ̳yung sa iPhone. So I was reading it while I was talking to him. Sabi ko, expletive mo, you‘re fired. You‘re lying.ǁ And so I fired him, ―Go out of this office. I do not want to see your face again.ǁ That is how strict I am.

so — the Cabinet members — and they are here — they‘re only given, noon, one year, two years — one month. The directors, listen to the government. Directors, you‘re only given 15 days. And I do not want directors out of their office, you eat your lunch there, all of you in government, so that you can resume to work immediately. [applause]

Now, this is my deal with the public. There is the 8888. I cannot stop corruption and wrongdoings if you do not cooperate. You text me. Libre ̳yan - 8888. You name the public official, name his sins in that bulletin, and I will take it from there. Do not be afraid about libel, I will take care of that. [applause]

That is your job. I have to have your help. If you don't do anything, nothing. Everything. Police, military, everyone, including me. If you think that some of - I've done something wrong, say so. Do not be afraid.

We are all government workers, you are our employer. [applause] We get the money from your pocket to our pockets. Kami - kailan pa… Since when have you heard me talk about government and officials? I always address everybody, ―workers of government.ǁ

I seldom mention ―Malacañan Palaceǁ. It is not a palace, it is just a house of wood. So, why should I call it a palace? Maybe something like the European-style. I just call it office. Palace, the palace is there. [laughter] And besides, all the rats of Pasig are there. [laughter]

It’s just beside Pasig River. So all the rats are everywhere, landing there. It has a wild field, and they are not killed because they are Presidential mouse. [laughter]

That's what - that or soldier says. "Sir, don't shoot the Presidential mouse."

The people’s patience is wearing thin, so is mine.

I am reiterating my directive to all government agencies [with] frontline services to our people-from womb to tomb-to further streamline their respective services to make these truly efficient and people-friendly.

We want to ensure that our people receive the quality services that they surely deserve minus the delays by the bureaucratic red tape. I expect speedy reforms along this line.

We’ll rightsize the national government. Let us trim the excess fat and add more muscle through the expeditious passage of ―The Act Rightsizing the National Government to Improve Public Service Institute.ǁ [applause]

I therefore urge Congress to pass this at the soonest.

For the Government Owned and Controlled Corporations — isa pa kayo — the implementation of the existing Salary Standardization Law pending review in the Compensation and Position Classification System. Excessive, extravagant, and unconscionable salaries and allowances, incentives, benefits and bonuses across the Government Owned or Controlled Corporations at this time, in crisis.

You‘ll have to pass by my office and I am not inclined to increase your allowances, bonuses, and salaries at this time. Wala ̳yan. [applause]

You cannot do it on your own. You have to direct it to the Executive Secretary. And I‘ll just tell you, I am not inclined to give increases right now. Maybe seven years from now, when Drilon makes it to the presidency.

I also appeal to the Supreme Court to seriously consider the national interest and our development goals before issuing TROs and injunctions on critical government projects and cases involving government assets.

I am just a co-worker also, ladies and gentlemen. May I be allowed to be also just as frank? After all, I am not harming anyone, eh. I do not need to offend you.

But I cite, for example, the Supreme Court TRO that prevents the Department of Health from distributing subdermal implants, which caused a wastage of P350-million worth of taxpayers‘ money. I also note that since its issuance two years ago, this TRO has impaired the government‘s ability to fully implement responsible planning — family planning methods in the RH Law.

It is time that we put an end to the practice of some parties of resorting to technicalities in our laws to prevent the government from fulfilling its mandate.

Anyway this is as good as any other time to talk to you. And may I be understood by you — I am sorry to say this, really, I am — I do not intend to do it. But if we have

to talk about government and our sins, which I am not an exception, all our — you know — delays, we are all mistaken

That's it, two things. I really don’t have time anymore. I’ll just stay… I don’t know if I can make another SONA again in the future. It’s - it’s not for me to tell.

This TRO has been the bane of projects. And even Consunji, the Ayalas, are fighting
̳Yan. Just to make you understand that it's not just you. Then, that TRO would delay the projects. Now God - and I’m asking Congress, find me a law that if there was bidding and it was regular, the court or somebody else shouldn’t be messing it up.

Because it can delay the projects, which has been the case in the provinces. You know, file
That is the case - either it is really the truth and the COA will find out or he will share - ―I will withdraw the case and dissolve the TRO of course. But just give me a few - 10 percent.ǁ

That is the attitude of the Filipino. So that TRO is the bane of our efficiency, and I really don’t know whether I won’t attribute anything, ma’am, to the Supreme Court.

Maybe I am at fault so I am sorry if I misquote or I did not have the complete facts. But this Congress passed the Reproduction Law. It was already a law that had to be implemented because we are really going into a family planning. I am not for abortion. I am not for birth control. But certainly, I am for giving freedom to a Filipino family the size of his family. [applause]

How many children would he be able to support and send to school? What happened to this TRO, sir, ma’am, someone filed it with you-Supreme Court-and then you issued a TRO two years ago. In the meantime, ̳yung - the government, bought medicine - it's subdermal as well as pills worth 360. It wasn't really a reckless purchase. It was in preparation for the implementation of the law.

It was not intended to TRO and it has been two years. The medicines will expire next month. I told Ubial, the Health Secretary, to find out if there is a nation who- which would allow it and i- donate na lang rather than go to waste.

That's what happened. I do not blame you. You might have been very busy or something. Nothing. I, I ̳m just… I am below you, actually. But I'm just saying. There is another.


Don't just make this speech, it's useless, there's nothing to be gained from it. [laughter] The bane-this is another-the Congress and we in the government, including the judges and justices, should understand that by this time, ̳the lowest bid, ̳that is what promotes graft and corruption in our town. [applause]

COA, you are here. Just let me know that I have a violation. There in the military, I do not allow them to bid and just to buy the weapons from everywhere, because almost all countries are making arms. They call it, small arms industry. We’re just fighting a rebellion. True, we do not need the armaments.

But there in Marawi, you have to hit hard because they are prepositioned inside buildings. And until now, we cannot proceed fast because there are 300 hostages. I said, ―Do not assault. If necessary, we’ll just have to wait. Wait it out.ǁ

But we have to give food. You do not - I do not care if they are Moro or Christians. It’s not… We don’t have that luxury. Because ̳pag - there is a distinct possibility that we attack, they will just behead everybody.

So, find a way to do it. If you can't find a way to do it then just I said, ―Wait it out.ǁ They lasted. It may be said that this soldier does not know. I will stop it. Initially, I said bomb. ―Eh, sir, it can't really be carried, sir.ǁ Every window is occupied, ̳the high-rise. And we were losing because of the snipers. And in there, they hurry, I said, ―Slow down.ǁ

When I was - I'm not bragging - when I was in the camp in Ranao, while I was briefing - I was being briefed by the military and was giving the instructions, I heard about 16 shots and moreover ̳yung bala na, ―Weng, weng , weng! ǁ Your reporters are behind the stage because it's cement ̳yun eh. We will what… I said, ―If this is how we should wait, then we’ll wait. Unless you can find a solution - somebody here who has a good, even a horse sense to negotiate for the release of ǁ

There's this one. I will return the lowest bid. You know that ̳yan adre eh. The one who drops the lowest bid, the one without money. The one who drops the lowest bid, he will say to what, ―I will give it to you.ǁ Who are the officials. So, lowest bid will win him. So, with no capital, he will give money. Then give, all he give, connected - all. After that, if it's a 100-million project, he has to pay so many guys, he left 100--out of the 100, only 40 million, so that is the cost of the project.

So, when I was campaigning for the Presidency, I was all over the Philippines. My God, I could see a - the appropriation, but their airport, three meters long. So we just made a basketball court. [laughter]

And there is a province here. Not you, not you. If you look into the records back in time the roads there were very complex. Really way here, way there. But ̳when you go, it's only a hundred. It’s only one highway. That is how corruption destroys the nation.

Now, last. I have to say this. I have to tell him, sir, eh. I was elected June 30, I swore. So, July I went to Davao - to the AFP Medical Center. Have I told you this, haven't I? Then I said - it’s quite familiar, because I signed a letter when I was mayor. I said, ―Do you have an MR (I)? ǁ They said, ―No, sir.ǁ I said, ―Do you have a state-of-the-art X-ray? ǁ They said, ―No, sir.ǁ I said, ―Do you have hyperbaric? ǁ That's the chamber where you are placed inside if you suffer the bends, ̳yung nagdi-deep dive ka. But it is also high-pressured that can arrest gangrene, especially those who are extracted from the field of battle about two days ago, gangrene sets in. So, they are placed there. And it can work miracles for a wounded soldier. So, in one seat, in one sitting, you did this…

Then, I saw the building and I went inside. The drainage was coming back. So I said, ―You know, I am really surprised. You‘re military men, why would you allow that kind of…ǁ The dirt is going back to… How do you expect the sailors to — the soldiers to get well?

Tapos, that‘s the only building. The old — the oldest. I said, ―Okay, you rehabilitate it. I‘ll give you a new one in the meantime.ǁ But last month I went to the back of my office, doon sa barracks ng Presidential guards. So, we were groundbreaking for the hospitals of the soldiers. And I asked the soldiers who were there also from V. Luna, ―Are you now using the equipment?ǁ

Alam mo ang sinagot sa akin, ―Sir, tayo-tayo na lang ang mag-usap huwag na ̳yan sila. T**** i**, wala pa. Hindi pa na-deliver.ǁ Sus.

Sinabi ko, ―If this is the way how you treat our soldiers and they are dying now and that machine was ordered a year ago, and then a coup d‘état, a mutiny is not a surprise to me.ǁ

Kaya sabi ko kay Ubial, hindi niya kasalanan it‘s because of the procurement. Pero ganun… Is Secretary Ubial here? Are you here Secretary? Change the procedure because I will change you.[laughter]

Talagang mag-coup d‘état ̳yan. Marami ng… We are losing about… By this time meron, every –
— everyday we lose about 10? Everyday. Sometimes I say it‘s a useless war. There is a rebellion. Sabi ko maski kung ako ang sundalo niyo and there is a machine already ordered it could have save my leg, tapos wala ma‘am, ay expletive, mag-coup d‘état ako.

And let us get the machine by ourselves. I will not be surprised if it‘s already in their minds. Ako, I am only be too willing to step down.

But as a long-term solution, I urge Congress to thoroughly review our existing procurement laws and come up with legislation that will ensure the prompt delivery of quality goods and services to the people, especially medicines and hospital equipment. [applause] Kasi itong military ang sabi ko do not mind COA about I will answer for that. Since COA is here I limit it to three places where the military can buy the equipment. Because I‘m sure that we will work and they can kill the enemies and make even our forces stronger or in parity with what they have on the other side.



These arms you will epxlain that. I will explain to COA why. Don't buy me there in the areas of South America and all there in mid-European —–Eastern European countries are also… There are good ones but I limited them to —- especially
equipment in listening because if you sell there to others, they also listen, at the same time. The three of you are already communicating. Call Bisaya, ―brin.ǁ

Our laws should support, and not impede, national development in a speedy and sustainable manner.

In our bid to accelerate human capital development, we seek to ensure lifelong opportunities by enhancing the quality of and access to education and training programs.

We have sustained investments in higher education and committed to the full implementation of the K to 12 Basic Education Program. We have widened the reach of skills training and increased the number of out-of-school children and youth who have availed of the Alternative Learning System.

To ensure that Filipinos are given equitable access to quality and affordable health services, we expanded health insurance coverage and benefits. The destitute and the indigents, or those who just could not afford hospitalization, can now be provided with free services by government- operated, public hospitals as we have strengthened the implementation of the No Balance Billing Policy. [applause] You Filipinos who are listening to me now, you will go to the hospital and I will pay, after all, they will not sue me. Just go in there occupy the hospital just say- true ————————- go in the hospital say that the Mayor said

Duterte seems to be treating us, he seems to be the one to pay. [applause] We have a lot of treasurers here. [Ah don't be different from that high.]


I have signed Executive Order No. 26 imposing a ban on smoking in public places to mitigate its consequences. [applause] We want to minimize access to tobacco products, and provide a more supportive environment for those who are attempting to quit tobacco use.

Do you know why? I was hit by… ̳Isn't it, I have been very frank with you. I have a Barrett and I have a Buerger’s disease, caused by smoking. So the problem with that - in a survey in the Philippines and all over the world, why is it that the women force - workforce in an office and the men have acquired in equal, almost in parity in numbers sick of cancer.

And it was found out because the poor girl has also to - inhale your smoke. So [inaudible] I'm in Davao… In Davao you can't see a person there walking with a cigarette. Foreigners, they are very - - they can argue with you, say that, ―This is my money not your money.ǁ Sabi ko,
―Then, okay. Eat your money or I will shoot your expletive. ǁ [laughter]

Investing in the health sector is never a cost to be endured but an opportunity to be explored.

If we are to embrace the vision of a prosperous Philippines, we have to start putting value to our people's well-being-because the success of every Filipino's pursuit in life, liberty and happiness directly mirrors the fulfillment of our aspirations as a Filipino.

I would like to reiterate my personal and this administration’s commitment to fully implement the Magna Carta of Women to the barangay level after this. [applause] To this effect, an executive order will be issued to local government units institutionalizing gender and development programs and services.

We are targeting to increase Government spending on infrastructure from 5 percent of GDP in 2017 to 7 percent of GDP by 2022, amounting to a total of 8 to 9 trillion pesos or 160 [applause] to 180 billion dollars in infrastructure projects. We will make the next few years the ―Golden Age of Infrastructureǁ in the Philippines to enhance our mobility and connectivity, and thereby spur equitable growth and development in the country. In other words, we are going to Build, Build and Build.

To improve our sea connectivity, we launched 15 brand new RORO vessels to ply major nautical routes all over the country. We also opened an ASEAN Ro-Ro Shipping Route connecting the ports of Davao and General Santos, Philippines to Bitung, Indonesia.

To address the congestion in our sea ports, we modernized the Ports of Iloilo, General Santos and Cagayan de Oro and Zamboanga. We shall complete strategic road and bridge projects and some of the road sections shall be widened and improved to address the worsening traffic.

You know Ma‘am Grace, you are pushing for… You know, when I became President, EDSA was already horrendous as it was a horror of the other administrations.

Now, I brought in Tugade because Tugade to me is a bright boy. He’s a billionaire. He was my classmate. I don't know if he's here. He was our valedictorian in the law class. Really great.

But we needed money and we tried to get your help to raise money. Don't give up. Eh ̳di until now ̳yung EDSA is still there. It's okay, and at least everything is fine, let's leave the ugly. We will not make it all smooth in the Philippines. We leave a little alley known as EDSA as the road to perdition.

But anyway since I could not get any funding. I traveled to China and make friends with them, and the ambassador is here, Ambassador Zhao, thank you for the help. And as a matter of fact [applause] willing… He said, ―If your Congress has no money, we will give you the money.ǁ And China has committed to build two bridges to span Pasig River, free of charge. [applause] So that you will be comfortable in crossing Pasig.

Anyway, all of these strategic road and transport projects shall go to naught if we cannot free our streets, which continue to be obstructed by illegally parked vehicles, ̳yang EDSA na ̳yan traffic obstructionists or undisciplined drivers who stop in the middle of the road, and unsanctioned barriers in some areas.

I am directing the MMDA and the LGUs of Metro Manila, as well as the LGUs of Metro Cebu and of all our regional centers, to ensure the free flow of traffic, and immediately clear our roads and thoroughfares of all unnecessary obstruction, including vehicles parked on the streets and barriers - [applause] [not] sanctioned by the Government, and penalize all traffic obstructionists regardless of stature…

Sometimes you don’t get hurt there because the police, it’s a Cabinet member. Pero may I have not - - authorized my Cabinet member to utilize the low plate. Is it not for us to, you just use an ordinary plate, so that the person has nothing to say. I don’t want you parking there when there’s no parking. Please remove

Airports, we are building new airports. We might get some money also from China and will have new airports in the coming days.

We are now accelerating the implementation of the Communications, Navigation, Surveillan


These reforms are designed to be pro-poor, especially when people understand how the revenues will be spent.

The passage of the Tax Reform Law is needed to fund the proposed 2018 budget which I am submitting here and today.

The poor and vulnerable [applause] are at the heart of my tax reform. Your full support will ensure that the benefits of the tax reform can be felt immediately by them.

In the meantime, the Department of Finance and Bureau of Internal Revenue are strengthening and running after tax evaders. [applause]

I have directed the Department of Finance and the BIR to accept Mighty Corporation’s offer of P25 billion to settle its tax liabilities. [applause] After the settlement, Mighty will no longer engage in the tobacco business.

This will be the biggest tax settlement on record. [applause] It will produce a windfall for government, which is significant, since we face the unexpected costs of rebuilding Marawi and Ormoc.

The acceptance of the tax settlement offer does not preclude other criminal charges against the company that the BIR may decide to file. A settlement will allow government to avoid a long [court] battle that, as we saw in previous cases, could take years to resolve.

Let this be a lesson to others. This administration will spare no one found cheating the government of its due.

We view Information and Communications Technology or ICT as an effective medium to implement positive and meaningful changes in our society.

To this end, my Cabinet approved the National Broadband Plan of 2017 to begin the work of bringing affordable Internet access to every community and improving broadband connectivity in the country.

We have also installed free Wi-Fi Internet in almost 400 public places around the country. [applause] We hope that the public will use them to access important information and services.

The National Government Portal, which we launched recently, will allow faster and easier delivery of public services and reduce the number of visits of the public to agencies for government transactions.

The Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting Migration Plan has also been launched. The switch to digital from analog transmission will not only give a better TV viewing experience but also provide effective and reliable information to Filipinos in times of calamities.

The government-owned Salaam Digital TV, the first Muslim TV in the Philippines, is now already on test broadcasting. [applause]

There are some of the things we have done for the past twelve months. A more detailed narrative is contained in my Report to the People, will be released soon. Whether or not my first year of administration was a year of gains or a year of setbacks is not for me to say but for the people to judge. I defer to the people’s judgment [applause].

My fellow citizens, much remains to be done. Corruption persists like a fishbone stuck in the throat. It pains and it is disconcerting. We need to pry corruption from the government corpus [where it] is deeply embedded. We also need to put an end to squabbles and bickerings within agencies [and] focus fully on the speedy provision of quality public services to our people.

Believe me, it is easier to build from scratch than to dismantle the rotten and rebuild upon its rubble.

Nevertheless, let us work together and lay a new foundation upon which a better Philippines can be reconstructed. Help me build a better tomorrow.

Let me end… Do you want us to go home? Or do you like a story? I have much more to tell you.

Let me end by wishing everyone in the language of the old: ―May God keep us forever sheltered in the hollow of His hand.ǁ

Thanks. [applause] - END -

