His Excellency President Ramos; Senate President Drilon and the other Senators; Speaker de Venecia and the other congressmen and congresswomen; the Justices of the Supreme Court; the members of the diplomatic corps; the urban poor who now watch on the video wall and on TV; many listen to the radio; my dear countrymen:
Recently, someone wrote to my three Payatas children, Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin. They made the letter into paper boats and floated it on the Pasig river to Malacañang.
This is what ten -year -old Jomar Pabalan wrote: "I hope my father will be given a permanent job so that he will not be in trouble."
Jason Vann Banogan, 10 years old, said: "I hope you can help me finish my studies until college, because my grandmother is the only one who teaches me."
And the only thing Erwin Dolera, eight years old, wants: close the Payatas dumpsite, and give land to his family.
The request of the children of Payatas: Work is very clear, very simple. Education. Own home. Add well: food at every table. This is the aspiration of the masses.
And this, in common sense and plain talk, is the core of my vision.
A vision for the future must be rooted in the past.
A revolution gave birth to the first republic in Asia.
A sense of nationhood was born but also the dream of a better life for all Filipinos. Andres Bonifacio, the poor man, the great plebeian who started this revolution, nurtured this dream.
In 1963, another poor man rose. He rose to the most powerful position in the land and risked everything to fulfill the poor man’s dream.
Inspired by the great plebeian, my father, President Diosdado Macapagal, promulgated the Land Reform Law to emancipate the peasant from a feudal bondage to the soil.
In 1986 Filipinos peacefully reclaimed their civil liberties in the people power revolution. Under the leadership of Corazon Aquino, we reaffirmed our commitment to freedom and democracy on a mere stretch of highway — with hardly a drop of blood shed or a shot fired in anger.
Six months ago, on that same highway, people rose up to restore morality as the first institution of society and as the animating principle of justice and the rule of law.
Thus, we see, the historic pillars of a national vision: prosperity, freedom, justice.
These are the goals the people have fought for since its birth: prosperity, freedom, justice.
We also see in our great history a progressive advancement towards the ultimate goal to transfer power over the state from the traditional economic and political bosses to the people.
Last May 1, the poor raised their voices in anger and their fists in fury. Imprisoned in poverty, shackled to shame, denied justice in society, they personally delivered the message that, 100 years after they revolted to establish this nation, they had yet to partake of the national dream.
I listened intently to their talk, and I was humbled. Isn’t it on my shoulders the responsibility to lead the struggle against the scourge of poverty? I am the son of the so -called “poor boy from Lubao”?
I take this duty upon my shoulders.
I do so without fear or foreboding of failure.
For I know that the greatest obstacle we as a nation must overcome is inside us. The enemy to beat is ourselves: when we spread division rather than unity; when we put ourselves above country and profit above fairness; when we think the worst of those with whom we should be working for the common good, and when we wallow in despair rather than rise to achievement – ​​indeed, when we make politics replace patriotism in our country’s hour of need.
Let us, here in the home of democracy, therefore resolve, to grab hold of this enemy within, and beat him.
The internal enemy engaged, the battle will not be easy. We inherited very difficult problems.
From 2.5 million jobless four years ago, unemployment now stands at 4 million. From a budget surplus in 1997 under President Ramos of more than a billion pesos, my government inherited a deficit exceeding 140 billion pesos. In the same period, poverty incidence rose from 36.8 percent of the population in 1997 to 40 percent in the year 2004.
And, unlike the situation in 1997 when a battered Asia could still lean on the strength of the advanced economies, today our main trading partners like Japan and America are slowing down as well.
But we will prevail. We will prevail because the mainstream of our nation is united.
In the May elections, this administration received a solid mandate to carry on with the business of governance and reform.
I do not view this mandate as a choice between personalities of this administration and those of the opposition.
I see it rather as a vote for all of us — administration and opposition — to roll up our sleeves, stop looking back, and move forward, most especially in the fight against mass poverty.
We are elected to fight poverty, not each other.
Our challenge is clear: Suppress poverty.
In this spirit, I appeal to everyone here today to undertake something unconventional but much to be desired in these especially hard times.
From today, let us set aside bickering and politicking for at least one year. We may congratulate ourselves on our forbearance at the next State of the Nation Address.
Instead of strife, let us work together for a year for the good of the people.
This is our duty. This is our mandate. This is our mission.
Unity for the country’s recovery will set the stage for national mobilization needed to undertake the great and difficult tasks ahead.
What are these tasks?
When I became president last January, I told the people about my vision of winning the war against poverty within the decade.
To succeed, the template of our national agenda must revolve around four components — four elements of the struggle against poverty.
The first is an economic philosophy of free enterprise appropriate to the 21st century. Entrepreneurship to increase employment. Not a pitiless free-for-all but free enterprise with a social conscience.
The second component is a modernized agricultural sector founded on social equity. Increase the income and yield of the peasant poor.
The third component is a social bias toward the disadvantaged to balance our economic development plan. Caring for the parts of society left behind by development.
And the fourth component is to raise the moral standards of government and society. Morality in government and society as the basis of real development.
Entrepreneurship, agricultural development, protection of the oppressed sector, and morality in government and society — these are our weapons in the people's war against poverty.
I have therefore organized my interpretation of the state of the nation along these four components of our national antipoverty ideology.
The first is an economic philosophy for the 21st century. Under this philosophy, the way to fight poverty is to create jobs, not destroy them.
To create jobs, we will attract investments. To attract investments, we will attend to macro measures and concerns.
In addressing macro concerns, we will focus on long-term structural issues. We started with the reform of the power sector, and I congratulate those of you who are here and who were in the previous congress for this accomplishment. Now, we will turn to other basics like infrastructure, productivity, and the savings rate.
In focusing on infrastructure, we will harness the private sector via the Build-Operate-Transfer Law. Our priorities include telecommunications facilities for high-speed productivity at low cost, roads to target tourist destinations, infrastructure for the modernization of agriculture, mass transport infrastructure for Metro Manila, and commuter and transport systems to disperse communities towards Subic-Clark and CALABARZON.
We will minimize bottlenecks to productivity, such as the high cost of power, deterrents to investments in agriculture, overly confrontational labor-management relations, and corruption and red tape at the national and local government levels.
To reduce the cost of power, we will begin implementing the Power Sector Reform Law which the previous Congress just passed.
To reduce deterrents to investments in agriculture, I ask Congress to enact a law making farmland acceptable as loan collateral.
To reduce excessive friction in labor and management relations, we will go the extra mile to work for industrial peace, and to work with labor and business to retrain workers for the fast-changing technologies of the new economy.
To reduce corruption in the Executive Branch, Cabinet Secretaries will have to deliver tangible results within 12 months in fighting graft. Our new e-Procurement Program will save billions and minimize anomalies. And I gave the reinforced Presidential Anti-Graft Commission added teeth to investigate and prosecute moto propio corruption in high places. And we will make the BIR and Customs showcases in this fight against graft and corruption.
To reduce corruption among elective officials, we will help honest people get elected by financing the full computerization of elections. We have released 2 billion pesos of the 3.4 needed for computerization. I ask congress to add another 500 million in the 2002 budget. Let us make the polls of May 14, 2001 the last national elections that use primitive methods of voter identification and ballot tabulation.
To reduce red tape in the national government, within 12 months, all government agencies will implement measures to cut in half the number of signatures required for their service. Housing permits shall only need 45 approvals, instead of 188. If legislation is required to effect this efficiency, the agencies concerned will draft appropriate bills for my endorsement to Congress.
I congratulate the LTO for issuing licenses in half an hour. I congratulate the NBI for issuing clearances in one day.
I ask our local governments likewise to streamline their operations and slash red tape. There must be continuity between national and local governments in their efforts to be investor-friendly.
We will address issues related to the savings rate, so that the cost of domestic capital can be reduced. These issues are tied up with the strength of the financial and fiscal sectors.
With regard to the financial sector, I ask Congress to amend the BSP charter and the Banking Act to improve supervision and promote financial prudence. These amendments should take us out of the money laundering list.
We adhere to a freely convertible peso and market exchange rates. However, we support the Central Bank’s measures to curb speculation.
To those speculating against the peso, I only have this to say: Have you no pity for the common people, have you no love for your country? You will feel guilty.
Instead of speculating, let us further strengthen the financial sector. We will design innovative policies to develop our capital market. We will set up a secondary housing mortgage market, an asset management company, and a provident fund for overseas Filipinos. We will simplify and clarify the system of incentives. We will interpret investment laws in favor of the investor.
And I ask Congress to enact laws on capital market reform such as the Personal Equity Retirement Act, the Investment Company Act, the Securitization Act, and amendments to the Securities Regulation Code.
With regard to the fiscal sector, we will control the budget deficit by collecting taxes vigorously and spending money prudently. For the longer term, I ask Congress to enact a law providing for a gross income tax.
Let’s get rid of tax deductions that only cause dire corruption.
The strength of the financial and fiscal sectors partly lies in how we use the realities in the global and regional environment to our benefit. Thus, we will enhance our relations with the United States, whose economic and military power continues to make it important as a factor in the affairs of the region and in the nation. We will also strengthen bilateral economic and political relations with Japan, our biggest source of development assistance and a major trading partner. And more and more, we will design foreign policy and foreign trade policy in the context of ASEAN. And I ask Congress to enact a law giving overseas Filipinos, who continue to play a critical role in the country’s economic and social stability, the right to vote.
Preparing our growth sectors of the future enables us to tap the opportunities of the 21st century.
We will promote fast-growing industries where high-value jobs are most plentiful. One of them is information and communications technology, or ICT. Our English literacy, our aptitude, and skills give us a competitive edge in ICT. Filipino workers are ranked number one in the field, number one among knowledge workers. And analysts point to two developing countries as the likely world centers for software development and data management in this decade: India and the Philippines. We will live up to that forecast.
As a first step, let us declare that technology is the foundation of future economic development, as China did in 1998. ICT will jumpstart our old stalling economy and make it leapfrog into the new economy.
High-speed connectivity at low cost will increase the use of ICT. It is also the way for Smart and Globe to properly interconnect. Then we will finally hear the last of those annoying words, "network busy."
Our rules will promote rather than regulate ICT, but in turn, I ask cellular phone companies to stop charging on dropped calls; this is both irritating and unfair to the public.
I ask Congress to enact laws to address Internet privacy and security, allow for multimedia convergence, and create a department of telecommunications and information technology.
To prepare our youth to be the next generation of knowledge workers, we will upgrade math and science teaching in basic education.
We will take a hard look at education and ask: Is it preparing the youth for the jobs of the new economy? Or is it just-keeping-them-off-the-streets-until-they-are-thrown-there jobless after graduation? If they finish school at all.
To increase the chances of Filipino children finishing school, we will minimize the cost of going to school. When we stopped the collection of miscellaneous fees last enrollment day, 900,000 more students enrolled than anticipated. And to reduce the time and money spent to actually travel to school, I want a school building in every barangay by 2004. We want the students' heads to be sharpened, and not to break their feet.
To improve the quality of education as required by the new economy, we will increase the number of textbooks per student as well as the quality of instruction. This year all public school students will have textbooks for priority subjects in grades 1 to 4 and in the 1st and 2nd years of high school. And they will have better paid and therefore better motivated teachers, not to mention more teachers because sound fiscal management enabled us to provide a supplemental budget of 1.5 billion pesos to hire more teachers and increase their pay without increasing our deficit.
Aside from ICT, we also have the competitive edge in tourism in the natural wonders of our country and the natural warmth of our people. We will provide the roads to those wonders and the means to take the tourists there. Thus, we will continue to liberalize the airline industry.
The second component of our national agenda to fight poverty is the modernization of agriculture founded on social equity.
Most of the poor live on farms, so let's enrich farming and fishing.
There can be a million new jobs in agriculture and fisheries. Within the year, the Department of Agriculture shall begin to implement the program to generate them. We will approach this with a sense of urgency. I do not want the one million new jobs to come in the long term. I want a timetable. I want to identify accountabilities. I want milestones.
This is not a promise to be nailed because the livelihood of millions of poor Filipinos depends on it.
My fellow farmers, your leader himself will take care of your well -being.
Starting tomorrow I will hold office at the Department of Agriculture, until i can get a clear and demonstrable picture of our agricultural accomplishments for our first 100 days and I can see the program for the million new jobs get off the ground, and I can see that short-term goals are in sync with the goals of farmer groups and agribusiness.
To create a million jobs in the countryside, we will finally implement the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Act or AFMA. At least 20 billion pesos will be spent to boost the income, yield, and catch of farmers and fishermen. These include the following: 6 billion in irrigation; 2 billion in postharvest facilities; 2 billion in infrastructure; 2 billion in loans; and 2 billion in research and development.
There is money — and there will be money — and the Department of Agriculture shall demonstrate its capacity to use these funds.
With 6 billion pesos in irrigation and 2 billion in postharvest from Aparri to Jolo, we can create 800,000 jobs. By opening 200,000 hectares of new arable land, it will create 200,000 jobs. In this way 1 million jobs will be created in the countryside.
But the production market must ensure new workers in agriculture and fishing as well as current farmers and fishermen.
For the convenience of the people, rice should not be in short supply. AFMA says, let's try to have rice self-sufficiency. In the meantime, we will remove the monopoly of the NFA in importation. If a shortage seems likely, we will allow the farmers themselves to import rice, as long as they pay customs duties. The tax paid will be used for the modernization of rice production.
Cheap rice and prosperous farmers — this is what we want for the masses.
The government will help the coconut farmers even more once the coconut levy case is resolved in favor of the farmers. When this happens, the funds will be used for the modernization of coconuts. I repealed the coconut levy order from the previous administration so as not to deprive the farmer. We will not stop as long as the coconut farmer does not benefit from the coco levy fund.
To fight poverty, agricultural modernization will be socially equitable. We shall redeem in earnest the promise of land reform, a commitment that spans several presidents. This is another promise that should not be broken.
Each year, the government will distribute 200,000 hectares for land reform: 100,000 of private land and 100,000 hectares of public land, including 100 ancestral domain titles for indigenous peoples.
We will bring our war against poverty to rural Mindanao, especially the areas most affected by the past conflicts. We have helped more than half of the 27,000 evacuee families return to their farms and rehabilitate their homes. The rest will go back home this year. In the next 12 months, we will spend 500 million pesos from the OPEC fund for community projects in these areas.
If the long-delayed Malmar irrigation dam is not completed by September, I will transfer its construction to the army engineering brigade. This dam is so important because it will irrigate 3,000 hectares immediately, with another 10,000 to follow next year.
We will make Mindanao the gateway to ASEAN by putting back on track the East ASEAN growth area.
Inshala, the promise of Mindanao can be true under my administration.
The third component of our national agenda is a social bias to balance economic development.
This social bias consists in immediate measures for the poor as well as improving and ensuring the quality of life of the masses.
Apart from the peasants, the urban poor are the main sector in need of immediate assistance.
To help them immediately, our administration has granted the right to purchase land to live on more than 80,000 poor families. And we will work double time to give security of land tenure to 150,000 urban poor families every year; 150,000 families annually will have the right to purchase their own housing. I do this because I get ‘sad’ when I see a squatter in my hometown.
The public's grievances over expensive goods and low wages must also be addressed. I hope the congress or wage board decides on the appropriate salary. In the meantime, I call on competent entrepreneurs: Provide the emergency cost of living allowance immediately. It can be credited when there is a new wage or allowance from the law or the wage board.
On the other hand, the government is acting to curb rising prices of basic labor needs. Monitoring the price of oil, and thankfully it dropped on Friday. The government is also trying not to raise fares, especially the LRT.
Because the price of rice is so important to the workers, we will launch 1,000 rolling stores. Workers and the poor can buy rice here for 14 pesos instead of 18 per kilo.
The price of medicine will also go down. Within a year we will divide the price of the drug that the public often buys.
And to avoid huge medical costs, this year, half a million urban poor will be included in national health insurance. That way, the insurance will pay for the treatment.
And to prevent rents from threatening to rise, we help workers and the poor have their own homes. 10,000 homes in various places are ready for workers and the poor to move here. We have also funded the construction of 18,000 more homes. Every year, 100,000 shelters will be built for workers and 50,000 housing units for the poorer. Government financial institutions have 20 billion pesos available for workers' housing.
Save: 20 billion pesos for mass homes. This is the government's offering for the security of the Filipino family.
In order for these programs to run smoothly, I ask Congress to create a housing department. A department of housing will not only build homes for the poor, it will also spark the housing industry and create jobs.
I also ask Congress that with the tax reform that you undertake, increase the category of workers who do not have to pay taxes.
We have a special project for the poor youth of Metro Manila who can no longer study, but do not have a job. This is the Emergency Employment Program. Each year, 20,000 out-of-work, out-of-school youth will be given immediate employment. They can patch the roof, fix the railing, guard the school of their barangay, clean the road or estuary, or other urgent work.
The social bias in our economic development plan involves ensuring the quality of life of the masses.
In a letter from Erwin from Payatas — the one I mentioned at the beginning of the discourse — he asked for the dumpsite to be closed. We really need to have a new waste management system. Garbage causes many problems in the city: bad air, disease outbreaks, traffic, and so on. Let's finish this. I instructed the Metro Manila Development Authority that within a year, launch a program to fix the waste problem.
We are all disgusted, especially the public, with the traffic of Metro Manila. Traffic will be reduced with the help of mass transit. We are building five new mass transit lines to accommodate nearly 4 million passengers. Three lines will be completed in 2004, one in 2005, and another in 2006. These five mass transit systems are being prioritized because they will add 119 kilometers of railway projects. During construction, I expect the MMDA to minimize the resulting congestion, and I expect it to minimize the current congestion within six months.
Metro Manila is too crowded, so life in slum areas is miserable. There will be fast transportation that will connect neighboring regions with Manila. Those who are already overcrowded in Manila, will one day move to the sunny province.
We will decongest Metro Manila by attracting communities north towards Subic-Clark, and south towards CALABARZON and Batangas port. We will achieve this not by demolishing shanties but by building commuter and transport systems to better homes.
Whether in Metro Manila or in the countryside, we will make microfinance a cornerstone in our fight against poverty. This means small accommodations for small businesses. Opportunity microfinance bank, the first microlending program in the country to become a bank, has just been licensed. Each year, we will add 300,000 poor women to benefit from the microfinance program.
It's time for the little ones to benefit from the town's savings. And you hope so, the masses pay. In microfinance, the repayment rate is 98 percent.
Many of our barangays still do not have electricity. So every day, every night, electricity will be connected to the four barangays. As a result, 85 percent of the barangays will be lit up within a year.
With exports slowing down due to the world downturn, we will strengthen the domestic market. We will intensify efforts to promote small and medium enterprises or SMEs especially in the countryside. Last Friday I inaugurated the SME board in the Philippine Stock Exchange. To help small and medium enterprises, I will restore the policy of providing government guarantee for their bank loans.
The fourth component of our national agenda is improving moral standards and the rule of law.
We need every ounce of resource to wage this war on poverty. We cannot afford to lose anything to waste or graft and corruption.
First we must strengthen justice and the enforcement of law and order.
This pertains to two levels. At the level of principle, this administration affirms its commitment to the principle that no one is above the law.
Thus, our policy is to support the fair and speedy trial of all the accused involved in the cases against Former President Joseph Estrada.
If there were times that I showed concern for the personal circumstances of the former president, it is not a sign of diminished determination to see justice done.
Rather, it is out of sensitivity to the feelings of the segments of our masa who have continued to identify with his personal circumstances.
But as I sometimes extend a hand covered by a velvet glove, inside it is an iron hand where justice and the rule of law are concerned.
As a sign of this, I will support legislation to amend the charter of the ombudsman so he can accept the services of private prosecutors.
The second level pertains to our sense that justice prevails and the rule of law works in our daily lives.
A reenergized police will stamp out the crimes that have plagued our businesses, terrorized the common folk, and embarrassed our country. In the economics of fighting crime, the more resources devoted to crime prevention, the less the amount of crime. Our administration will spend to modernize and professionalize the police. We will start with 1 billion pesos.
Although the numbers say that index crimes in the first semester were down 14 percent since a year ago, we are determined to stamp out violent crimes altogether. The ongoing reorganization of the police is part of the effort to add vigor to its anti-crime drive. The new national anti-crime commission will tighten coordination among law enforcement agencies as well as with the Chinese-Filipino community. We are giving special attention to the kidnap-for-ransom syndicates. I want the bulk of them to be behind bars before the year is over, so that every Filipino will at last feel safe in his home, in his workplace, and in his streets.
On the drug front, I ask Congress to enact a law reducing the amount of drugs in a suspect’s possession for him to be charged with drug trafficking.
We will uphold law and order through a holistic response consisting of political, economic, psychosocial, and security components. We will meet the defense and security challenges of this era. To achieve this end, we have earmarked additional funding in several billions of pesos for the AFP modernization program.
We have given the Armed Forces and the police the leeway to fight a treacherous and elusive enemy in Basilan. But it must end, and it will end soon, for good. The leadership of the Abu Sayyaf has started to fall. The crackdown has neutralized 130 of them. Many of them have come down from their mountains because they have been abandoned by their leaders. Lay it on the rock: we will finish it.
On the peace process, while the AFP stands ready to protect our people at a moment’s notice, we will continue to talk with the Moro Islamic Liberation Front and the National Democratic Front as long as all sides maintain good faith. Our ceasefire agreement with the MILF last month encouraged us in this.
To attain our full potential as a nation, let us come to terms with the fundamental issues in Mindanao. Let us forge consensus on a just, lasting, and honorable peace in one country. Peace and development are inseparable twins. But our framework must not compromise constitutionality, national sovereignty, and territorial integrity. Instead, let us recognize that we have a multiethnic society which should be founded on social justice for all and institutionalized accommodation of ethnic traditions. This would finally introduce a new culture in our nation’s attitude towards Mindanao.
We will also introduce a new culture in governance: a culture of plain talk and common sense.
Cabinet secretaries will do less cluster and interagency committee work so they can concentrate on running their departments. Less meetings, more action, more tangible results whether in generating jobs, improving peace and order, or fighting graft.
I throw full support behind BIR commissioner Rene Bañez. He has undertaken a mission many believe impossible: overhauling the BIR which accounts for 80 percent of our tax revenues.
Rene has been threatened. He has been blocked by restraining orders at every turn. After the Supreme Court ruled in his favor, he was accused of the very corruption he is stamping out.
This man needs friends, who share his goals, and I know he will find them in this young Congress.
The Bureau of Customs is exceeding collection targets. But the anti-smuggling drive must be relentless. So must the drive against the harassment of legitimate businessmen doing legitimate imports. I call on all concerned to help end the open drawer syndrome.
But the government cannot do it alone. It cannot do it alone in customs, it cannot do it alone in fighting graft, it cannot do it alone in fighting poverty. I’m not a miracle worker. All of us must do our share. We have to think Filipino, buy Filipino, invest Filipino. I invite the taipans and other business people all over the country to start pump-priming the economy by investing once again in the Philippines. I invite you to create jobs, accelerate progress, and thereby address the root causes of the crime and unrest that so much alarm us.
In other words, compatriots, let us unite and work together to fight the scourge of poverty and promote prosperity, peace, and justice in the country. Let's unite. Fight poverty.
I’ve said a lot about what I’m going to do. But the purpose of all the plans, programs, and measures I have identified can be expressed in a few words: employment, education, own home, food at every table.
Of all I can give to the town, livelihood, wisdom, home, and food for the masses I will be most proud of all.
All of this is for young people like Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin, and their future children because it is our duty to future generations.
Compatriots, I would like to introduce you to the children of Payatas. Here are Jason, Jomar, and Erwin.
Thank you, Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin. Thank you and write me letters that you made a paper boat and floated in Pasig.
Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin, listen to me.
We will increase the number of employed compatriots. We will increase the number of children who can go to college. We will increase the number of people who have their own homes. We will multiply the family with food on the table. Your dream is my dream too. I will do everything to make our dream come true.
Compatriots: help me fulfill the dream of Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin. Let us unite so that all youth — including their parents — can have a new life and a new hope for the future.
Work. Prisoner. Education. Food at every table.
Thank you, Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin, for reminding me of my very important role.
You have reminded us all why we are here today in this hall.
Senators and Congressmen: Let us promise them, before and with the help of God, that in the coming days, months, and years, we the elected, we who are responsible for their future will be willing to sacrifice and unite for good, prosperity, stability of the people, and the future of the youth.
Jayson, Jomar, and Erwin, we will not disappoint you.
I am not a miracle worker. But I will do what is right and I will do my best. Let us all do what is right, let us all do what is best, and God will take care of the rest.
Thanks to all of you.
