Thank you, Speaker Nograles. Senate President Villar. Senators and Representatives. Vice President de Castro, President Ramos, Chief Justice Puno, members of the diplomatic corps, ladies and gentlemen:
I address you today at a crucial moment in world history.
Just a few months ago, we ended 2007 with the strongest economic growth in a generation. Inflation was low, the peso strong, and a million new jobs were created. We were all looking to a better, brighter future. [Applause]
Because tough choices were made, the town was finally acting. We would have been close to balancing the budget. We were retiring debts in great amounts, reducing the drag on our country’s development, while investing in the people. [Applause]
Suddenly, the world economy was upside down. The jump in oil and food prices provoked a global crisis, the worst since the Great Depression and the end of World War II. Some blame speculators moving billions of dollars from subprime mortgages to commodities like fuel and food. Others point to the very real surge in demand as millions of Chinese and Indians move up to the middle class.
Whatever the reasons, we are on a roller coaster ride of oil price hikes, high food prices, and looming economic recession in the US and other markets. Uncertainty has moved like a terrible tsunami around the globe, wiping away gains, erasing progress.
This is a complex time that defies simple and easy solutions. For starters, it is hard to identify villains, unlike in the 1997 financial crisis. Everyone seems to be a victim, rich countries and poor, though certainly some can take more punishment than others.
To address these global challenges, we must go on building and buttressing bridges to allies around the world: to bring in the rice to feed our people; investments to create jobs; and to keep the peace and maintain stability in our country and the rest of the world. Yet even as we reach out to those who need, and who may need us, we strive for greater self-reliance. [Applause]
Because tough choices were made, the global crisis did not catch us helpless and unprepared. Through foresight, grit, and political will, we built a shield around our country that has slowed down and somewhat softened the worst effects of the global crisis. [Applause] We have the money to care for our people and pay for food when there are shortages; for fuel despite price spikes. [Applause]
Neither we nor anyone else in the world expected this day to come so soon but we prepared for it. For the guts not to flinch in the face of tough choices, I thank God. For the wisdom to recognize how needed you are, I thank you Congress. [Applause] For footing the bill, I thank the taxpayers. [Applause]
The result has been, on the one hand, this is what saved the town; on the other, more unpopularity for myself in the opinion polls. Yet even unfriendly polls show self-rated poverty down to its 20-year low in 2007. [Applause]
My responsibility as President is to take care, to solve the problems we are facing now, and to provide a vision and direction for how our nation should advance in the future.
Many in this great hall live privileged lives and exert great influence in public affairs. I am accessible to you, but I spend time every day with the underprivileged and under represented who cannot get a grip on their lives in the daily, all-consuming struggle to make ends meet.
I am worried for the pitiful housewife who bears the responsibility for the whole family. I am worried for the farmer in the first row of national food production but trying to feed the family. I care for hardworking students soon to graduate and wanting to see hope of good job and a career prospect here at home.
I’m worried for the 41-year old head of the family who doesn’t work every day, and is bothering his wife and three children, and should be given more income and dignity. I care for our teachers who gave the greatest gift we ever received — a good education — still trying to pass on the same gift to succeeding generations. I care for our OFWs, famed for their skill, integrity, and untiring labor, who send home their pay as the only way to touch loved ones so far away. [Applause] I salute their ordinary Filipinos today. [Applause]
My critics say this is fiction, along with other facts and figures I cite today. I call it heroism though they don’t need our praise. Each is already a hero to those who matter most — their families.
I said this is a global crisis where everyone is a victim. But only few can afford to avoid, or pay to delay, the worst effects.
Many more have nothing to protect them from the immediate blunt force trauma of the global crisis. Like you, I worry for them. These are the people of the town that we must accompany. Not only because of their sacrifices for our country but because they are our countrymen. [Applause]
How do we solve these many complex challenges?
In their case, the answer must be special care and attention in this great hour of need.
First, we must have a targeted strategy with a set of precise prescriptions to ease the price challenges we are facing.
Second, food self-sufficiency; less energy dependence; greater self-reliance in our attitude as a people and in our posture as a nation. [Applause]
Third, short-term relief cannot be at the expense of long-term reforms. [Applause] These reforms will benefit not just the next generation of Filipinos, but the next President as well. [Applause]
Value-added tax [VAT] is very important in addressing these challenges.
This program is the answer to the problems we inherit. [Applause]
First, reduce our debts and shore up our fiscal independence. [Applause]
Second, more investment for citizens and infrastructure. [Applause]
Third, adequate funding for mass programs. [Applause]
Thus, the infrastructure links programmed for our poorest provinces like Northern Samar: Lao-ang-Lapinig-Arteche, right now is muddy; San Isidro-Lope de Vega; the rehabilitation of Maharlika in Samar. [Applause]
Take VAT away and you and I abdicate our responsibility as leaders and pull the rug from under our present and future progress, which may be compromised by the global crisis.
Investor confidence has been further strengthened by VAT. From P56.50 per dollar, the peso strengthened to P40.20 before returning to P44 due to the burdens of the global economy. If VAT is removed, business confidence will weaken, interest will increase, the peso will fall, the price will become more expensive.
When the VAT on oil and electricity is abolished, the more beneficiaries will be the well -to -do who consume 84% of oil and 90% of electricity while the poor who will lose P80 billion for VAT -funded programs will be hurt more. [Applause] Take away VAT and we strip our people of the means to ride out the world food and energy crisis. [Applause]
We have come too far and made too many sacrifices to turn back now on fiscal reforms. Leadership is not about doing the first easy thing that comes to mind; it is about doing what is necessary, however hard. [Applause]
The government has persevered, without flip-flops, in its much-criticized but irreplaceable policies, including oil and power VAT and oil deregulation.
The government will continue to use our growing resources to help families suffering from high prices and hurricanes, while investing to shield the town from future crises.
For those who massage and massage in the jeep, we suppress the coat and colorum to increase the income of the drivers. [Applause] Federico Alvarez earns P200 a day on his Cubao-Rosario route. The anti-kotong, anti-colorum now increased his income to P500. [Applause] That's the way the fare surcharge is kept at only P1. Just worth a text. [Applause]
Texting is a way of life. I asked the telecoms to cut the cost of messages between networks. They responded. It is now down to 50 centavos. [Applause]
In June, we released 4 billion pesos from VAT on oil — 2 billion to pay for electricity for 4 million poor, 1 billion for college scholarships or loans to 70,000 poor students; [applause] half a billion loan to replace the motors of thousands of jeepneys with more economical LPG, CNG, or biofuel; [applause] and half a billion fluorescent replacements in public places. [Applause]
If fluorescent could replace all light bulbs, we could save over P2 billion. [Applause]
In the next VAT extract, there will be P1 billion to pay for electricity by the poor; half a billion for seniors not covered by SSS or GSIS; half a billion capital for the families of the poor; half a billion to increase the capacity and equipment of small hospitals in the provinces. [Applause] And for disasters, appropriate amount.
We released P1 billion for the victims of typhoon Frank. We support a supplemental Western Visayas calamity budget from VAT proceeds, [applause] as a tribute to the likes of Rodney Berdin, age 13, of Barangay Rombang, Belison, Antique, who saved his mother, brother, and sister from the raging waters of Sibalom River. [Applause]
From this month, there will be no income tax for those earning P200,000 or less in a year — P12 billion tax deduction for the poor and middle class. Thank you very much, Congress. [Applause]
Now with P32 commercial rice, we have addressed the food problem at present. We have succeeded because of the cooperation of the whole town in farming, price-keeping, and restrictions on price manipulation, under the hard work of Artie Yap. [Applause]
To the LGUs and religious groups that help bring NFA rice to the poor, thank you very much. [Applause]
Due to the subsidy, NFA rice is among the region’s cheapest. While we can take some comfort that our situation is better than many other nations, there is no substitute for solving the problem of rice and fuel here at home. In doing so, let us be honest and clear eyed — there has been a fundamental shift in global economics. The price of food and fuel will likely remain high. Nothing will be easy; the government cannot solve these problems over night. But we can work to ease the near-term pain while investing in long-term solutions. [Applause]
Since 2001, new irrigation systems for 146,000 hectares, including Malmar in Maguindanao and North Cotabato, Lower Agusan, Casecnan and Aulo in Nueva Ecija, Abulog-Apayao in Cagayan and Apayao, Addalam in Quirino and Isabela among others, and the restoration of old systems on another 980,000 hectares have increased our nation's irrigated land to a historic 1.5 million hectares. [Applause]
Edwin Bandila, 48 years old, of Ugalingan, Carmen, North Cotabato, cultivated 1 hectare and harvested 35 cavans. Thirteen years made your Malmar. In my first State of the Nation Address, I said if that didn’t end in September I would cancel the contract, I would let the engineering brigade in, they finished. With Malmar, now he cultivates 5 hectares [applause] and produces 97 cavans per hectare. Long live, Edwin! VAT will complete the San Roque-Agno River project. [Applause]
The Land Bank has quadrupled loans for farmers and fisherfolk. That is fact not fiction. Check it. For more effective credit utilization, I instructed DA to revitalize farmers cooperatives. [Applause]
We are providing seeds at subsidized prices to help our farmers.
Incremental Malampaya national revenues of P4 billion will go to our rice self-sufficiency program. [Applause]
Rice production since 2000 increased an average of 4.07% a year, twice the population growth rate. By promoting natural planning and female education, we have curbed population growth to 2.04% during our administration, down from the 2.36% in the 1990s, when artificial birth control was pushed. [Applause] Our campaign spreads awareness of responsible parenthood regarding birth spacing. Long years of pushing contraceptives made it synonymous to family planning. Therefore, informed choice should mean letting more couples, who are mostly Catholics, know about natural family planning. [Applause]
From 1978 to 1981, we exported rice. Didn't take long. But let’s not be too hard on ourselves. Even during the Spanish period, we used to buy rice outside. While we may know how to grow rice well, topography doesn’t always cooperate.
Nature did not gift us with a mighty Mekong like Thailand and Vietnam, with their vast and naturally fertile plains. Nature instead put our islands ahead of our neighbors in the path of typhoons from the Pacific. So, we import 10% of the rice we consume.
To meet the challenge of today, we will feed our people now, not later, and help them get through these hard times. To meet the challenges of tomorrow, we must become more self-reliant, self-sufficient, and independent, relying on ourselves more than on the world. [Applause]
Now we come to the future of agrarian reform.
There are those who say it is a failure, that our rice importations prove it. There are those who say it is a success — if only because anything is better than nothing. Indeed, people are happier owning the land they work, no matter what the difficulties.
At SONA in 2001, I said, every year, we would allocate 200,000 hectares to land reform: 100,000 hectares of private farmland; and 100,000 of public farmland, including ancestral domains. We have distributed far more than the target in the past seven years: 854,000 hectares of private farmland, 797,000 of public farmland, and Certificates of Ancestral Domain for 525,000 hectares. [Applause] Including, over a 100,000 hectares for the Bugkalots in Quirino, Aurora, and Nueva Vizcaya. After the release of their CADT, Rosario Camma, Bugkalot chieftain, and now mayor of Nagtipunan, helped his 15,000-member tribe develop irrigation, plant vegetables and corn, and achieve food sufficiency. Long live, Chief! [Applause]
Agrarian reform should not merely subdivide misery, it must raise living standards. Ownership raises the farmer from his knees but productivity will keep him on his feet.
My father started land reform in 1963. To make it happen, the extension of CARP with reforms is top priority. [Applause] I will continue to do all I can for the rural as well as urban poor. We do not want the release of the tenant to the landlord, it will be under the usurer. Former tenants must be empowered to become agribusinessmen by allowing their land to be used as collateral. [Applause]
Land reform must free the peasantry from enslavement to others. The farmer must be given dignity as a free person and not held by anyone. We must curb the recklessness that gives land without the means to make it productive and bites off more than beneficiaries can chew. [Applause]
At the same time, I want the rackets out of agrarian reform: [applause] the threats to take and therefore undervalue land, the conspiracies to overvalue it.
Be with me on this. There must be a path where justice and progress converge. Let us find it before Christmas. [Applause] We must clear the way for those who want to pursue farming, with the belief that the land will save us in the end if we use it properly.
Along with massive rice production, we are cutting costs through more efficient transport. For our farm-to-market roads, we released P6 billion in 2007.
On our nautical highways. RORO boats carried 33 million metric tons of cargo and 31 million passengers in 2007. We have built 39 RORO ports during our administration, 12 more are slated to start within the next two years. In 2003, we inaugurated the Western Nautical Highway from Batangas through Mindoro, Panay and Negros to Mindanao. This year we launched the Central Nautical Highway from Bicol mainland through Masbate, Cebu, Bohol and Camiguin to Mindanao mainland. [Applause] These developments strengthen our competitiveness.
Leading multinational company Nestle cut transport costs and offset higher milk prices abroad. Thanks, RORO. [Applause] Transport costs have become so reasonable for bakeries like Gardenia, a loaf of its bread in Iloilo is priced the same as in Laguna and Manila. Thanks again to RORO. [Applause]
To the many LGUs who have stopped collecting fees from cargo vehicles, many, many thanks. [Applause]
We are repaving airports that are useful for agriculture, like Zamboanga City Airport. [Applause]
Producing rice and moving it cheaper addresses the supply side of our rice needs. On the demand side, we are boosting the people’s buying power.
We make the construction and repair of roads and irrigation labor-intensive. During SONA of 2001, we launched in NCR a workplace for 20,000 out of school youth, called OYSTER. Today, OYSTER employs more than 20,000 nationwide. [Applause] In disaster-stricken areas, we have a cash-for-work program.
In training, 7.74 million took technical and vocational courses over the last seven years, double the number in the previous 14 years. In 2007 alone, 1.7 million graduated. Among them are Jessica Barlomento now in Hanjin as supply officer, Shenve Catana, Marie Grace Comendador, and Marlyn Tusi, lady welders, congratulations. [Applause]
In microfinance, loans have reached P102 billion or 30 times more than the P3 billion we started with in 2001, with a 98% repayment record, congratulations! [Applause] Major lenders include the Land Bank with P69 billion, the Peoples ’Credit and Finance Corporation P8 billion, the National Livelihood Support Fund P3 billion, DBP P1 billion, and the DSWD’s SEA-K P800 million. For partnering with us to unleash the entrepreneurial spirit, thank you, Go Negosyo and Joey Concepcion. [Applause]
Upland development benefits farmers through agro-forestry initiatives. Rubber is especially strong in Zamboanga Sibugay and North Cotabato. [Applause] Victoria Mindoro, 56 years old, used to earn P5,000 a month as a farmer and factory worker. Now she owns 10 hectares in the Goodyear Agrarian Reform Community in Kabasalan, Zamboanga Sibugay, earning P10,000 a week. [Applause] With 1 hectare, Pedro and Concordia Faviolas of Makilala, North Cotabato, sent their six children to college, bought two more hectares, and earn P15,000 a month. Congratulations! [Applause]
Jatropha estates are starting in 900 hectares in and around Tamlang Valley in Negros Oriental; 200 in CamSur; 300 in GenSan, 500 in Fort Magsaysay near the Cordero Dam, and 700 in Samar, among others.
In our 2006 SONA, our food baskets were identified as North Luzon and Mindanao.
The sad irony of Mindanao as food basket is that it has some of the highest hunger in our nation. It has large fields of high productivity, yet also 6 of our 10 poorest provinces.
The prime reason is the endless Mindanao conflict. A comprehensive peace has eluded us for half a century. But last night, differences on the tough issue of ancestral domain were resolved. Yes, there are political dynamics among the people of Mindanao. Let us sort them out with the utmost sobriety, patience, and restraint. I ask Congress to act on the legislative and political reforms that will lead to a just and lasting peace during our term of office. [Applause]
The demands of decency and compassion urge dialogue. Better talk than fight, if nothing of sovereign value is anyway lost. Dialogue has achieved more than confrontation in many parts of the world. This was the message of the recent World Conference in Madrid organized by the King of Saudi Arabia, and the universal message of the Pope in Sydney.
Pope Benedict’s encyclical Deus Caritas Est reminds us: “There will always be situations of material need where help in the form of concrete love for neighbor is indispensable.”
We bring together DSWD, DOH, GSIS, SSS, and other poverty-fighting programs into one National Social Welfare Program to protect the poorest from the global crisis, and to help those whose earnings are limited by illness, disability, loss of job, age, and so on — through livelihood projects, microfinance, skills and technology transfer, emergency and temporary employment, pension funds, food aid and cash subsidies, child nutrition and adult health care, medical missions, salary loans, insurance, housing programs, educational and other savings schemes, and now cheaper medicine — thanks to Congress. [Applause]
The World Bank says that in Brazil, the income of the poorest 10% has grown 9% per year versus the 3% for the higher income levels due in large part to their family stipend program linking welfare checks to school attendance. We have introduced a similar program, Pantawid Pamilya.
Employers have funded the two increases in SSS benefits since 2005. Thank you, employers, for paying the premiums. [Applause]
GSIS pensions have been indexed to inflation and have increased every year since 2001. Its salary loan availments have increased from two months equivalent to 10 months, the highest of any public or private system — while repayments have been stretched out.
Pag-Ibig housing loans increased from P3.82 billion in 2001 to P22.6 billion in 2007. This year it experienced an 84% increase in the first four months alone. [Applause] Super heating. GSIS should increase and SSS should reopen the housing loan. I ask Congress to pass a bill allowing SSS to do housing loans beyond the present 10% limitation. [Applause]
Before I became President, only 1.5 million poor people had health insurance. In 2001, we say, another half a million will be added. That year, we gave over 1 million. Today, 65 million Filipinos have health insurance, more than double that of 2000, including 15 million poor people. [Applause] PhilHealth has paid P100 billion for hospitalization. The indigent beneficiaries largely come from Central and West Visayas, Central Luzon, and Ilocos. We will continue to expand this very important program, especially in Tawi-Tawi, Zamboanga Norte, Maguindanao, Apayao, Dinagat, Lanao Sur, Northern Samar, Masbate, Abra, and Misamis Occidental. Especially to their farmers and fishermen. [Applause]
In these provinces and in Agusan Sur, Kalinga, Surigao Sur, and calamity-stricken areas, we will launch a massive school feeding program at P10 per child every school day.
Aside from free elementary and high school education, funding for college scholarships has doubled, while private high school scholarship funds from the government have quadrupled.
I have started reforming and clustering the programs of the DepEd, CHED, and TESDA.
As with fiscal and food challenges, the global energy crunch demands better and more focused resource mobilization, conservation, and management.
Government agencies are reducing their energy and fuel bills by 10%, emulating Texas Instruments and Philippine Stock Exchange who did it last year. Congratulations, Justice Vitug and Francis Lim. [Applause]
To reduce power system losses, we count on government regulators and also on EPIRA amendments.
We are successful in increasing energy self-sufficiency — 56%, the highest in our history. We promote natural gas and biofuel; geothermal fields, among the world’s largest; windmills like those in Ilocos and Batanes; and the solar cells lighting many communities in Mindanao. The new Galoc oil field can produce 17,000 to 22,000 barrels per day, 1/12 of our crude consumption.
The Renewable Energy Bill has passed the House. Thank you, Congressmen and Congresswomen. [Applause]
Our costly commodity imports like oil and rice should be offset by hard commodities exports like primary products, and soft ones like tourism and cyberservices, at which only India beats us.
Our P350 million training partnership with the private sector should qualify 60,000 for call centers, medical transcription, animation, and software development, which have a projected demand of 1 million workers generating $ 13 billion by 2010.
International finance agrees with our progress. Credit rating agencies have kept their positive or stable outlook on the country. Our world competitiveness ranking rose five notches. Congratulations to us. [Applause]
We are sticking to, and widening, the fiscal reforms that have earned us their respect.
To our investors, thank you for your valuable role in our development. [Applause] I invite you to invest not only in factories and services, but in profitable infrastructure, following the formula for the Tarlac-Pangasinan-La Union Expressway. [Applause]
I ask business and civil society to continue to work for a socially equitable, economically viable balance of interests. Mining companies should ensure that host communities benefit substantively from their investments, and with no environmental damage from operations. [Applause]
Our administration enacted the Solid Waste Management Act, Wildlife Act, Protection of Plant Varieties, Clean Water Act, Biofuels Act, and various laws declaring protected areas.
For reforestation, for next year we have budgeted P2 billion. [Applause] Not only do forests enhance the beauty of the land, they mitigate climate change, a key factor in increasing the frequency and intensity of typhoons and costing the country 0.5% of the GDP. [Applause]
We have set up over 100 marine and fish sanctuaries since 2001. In the whale shark sanctuary of Donsol [Sorsogon], Alan Amanse, a 40-year-old college undergraduate and father of two, was earning P100 a day from fishing and driving a tricycle. Now as whale shark-watching officer, he earns P1,000 a day, 10 times his former income. [Applause]
For clean water, so important to our health, there is P500 million this year and P1.5 billion for next year.
From just one sanitary landfill in 2001, we now have 21, with another 18 in the works.
We launched the Zero Basura Olympics to clear our communities of trash. Rather than more money, all that is needed is for each citizen to keep home and workplace clean, and for garbage officials to stop squabbling. [Applause]
Our investments also include essential ways to strengthen our institutions of governance in order to fight the decades-old scourge of corruption. I will continue to fight this battle every single day. [Applause] While others are happy with headlines through accusation without evidence and privilege speeches without accountability, we have allocated more than P3 billion — the largest anti-graft fund in our history — for real evidence gathering and vigorous prosecution. [Applause]
From its dismal past record, the Ombudsman’s conviction rate has increased 500%. [Applause] Lifestyle checks, never seriously implemented before our time, have led to the dismissal and/or criminal prosecution of dozens of corrupt officials. [Applause]
I recently met with the Millennium Challenge Corporation, a U.S. agency that provides grants to countries based on governance. They have commended our gains, contributed P1 billion to our fight against graft, and declared us eligible for more grants. Thank you! [Applause]
Last September, we created the Procurement Transparency Group in the DBM and linked it with business, academe, and the Church, to deter or catch anomalies in government contracts.
On my instruction, the BIR and Customs established similar government-civil society tie-ups for information gathering and tax evasion and smuggling monitoring.
More advanced corruption practices require a commensurate advances in legislative responses. Colleagues in Congress, we need a more stringent Anti-Graft Act. [Applause]
With the high cost of goods, it is difficult for the consumer — then, to be deceived. It must be stopped. I urge Congress to pass the Consumer Bill of Rights against price gouging, false advertising, and other anti -consumer activities. [Applause]
I call on all our government workers at the national and local levels to be more responsive and accountable to the people. It is a time of testing. Where the government can and should help, we must be there with a helping hand. Where government can contribute nothing useful, stay away. Let’s be more helpful, more courteous, more quick.
Our aspirations go hand in hand with the continuous care for the welfare of every Filipino. We have one dream — a prosperous and peaceful society, where a bright future is not just a dream, but a reality. [Applause]
We are together in this role. Every citizen, businessman, town leader, and church, ten of those in the province, has a role to play.
We are three branches but one government. We have our disagreements; we each have hopes, and ambitions that drive and divide us, be they personal, ethnic, religious, and cultural. But we are one nation with one fate. [Applause]
As your President, I care too much about this nation to let anyone stand in the way of our people’s well-being. I will not allow anyone to hinder the development and prosperity of the people. [Applause] I will let no one — and no one’s political plans — threaten our nation’s survival. [Applause]
Our country and our people have never failed to be there for us. We must be there for them now. [Applause]
Thanks a lot. Good evening to all. [Applause] [Standing ovation]