Thank you.

Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon. Before I begin my report to the nation, please join me first in a moment of prayer for President Aquino.

Senate President Enrile, Speaker Nograles, Senators, Representatives, Vice President de Castro, former President Ramos, Chief Justice Puno, Ambassadors, friends:

The past 12 months have been a year for the history books. Financial meltdown in the West spread throughout the world. Tens of millions lost their jobs; billions across the globe have been hurt — the poor always harder than the rich. No one was spared.

It has affected us already. But the story of the Philippines in 2008 is that the country weathered a succession of global crises in fuel, in food, then in finance and finally, economy in a global recession, never losing focus and with economic fundamentals intact. [Applause]

A few days ago, Moody’s upgraded our credit rating, citing the resilience of our economy. The state of our nation is a strong economy. [Applause] Good news for our people, bad news for our critics. [Applause]

I did not become President to be popular. To work, to lead, to protect and preserve our country, our people, that is why I became President. [Applause] When my father left the Presidency, we were second to Japan. I want our Republic to be ready for the first world in 20 years.

Towards that vision, we made key reforms. Our economic plan centers on putting people first. Above all, the purpose of our policy is to help hard -working ordinary Filipinos. [Applause] New tax revenues were put in place to help pay for better health care, more roads, and a strong education system. Housing policies were designed to lift up our poorer citizens so they can live and raise a family with dignity. Our investments in agriculture aim to recognize our farmers as the backbone of our country, [applause] and provide them with modern equipment to feed our nation and feed their own family.

Had we listened to the critics of those policies, had we not braced ourselves for the crisis that came, had we taken the easy road much preferred by politicians eyeing elections, this country would be flat on its back. [Applause] It would take twice the effort just to get it back again on its feet — to where we are now because we took the responsibility and paid the political price of doing the right thing. [Applause] For standing with me and doing the right thing, thank you, Congress.

The strong, bitter, and unpopular revenue measures of the past few years have spared our country the worst of the global financial shocks. They gave us the resources to stimulate the economy. They have given the LGUs the largest IRA increase of P40 billion this year, imparting strength throughout the country and every level of government.

Compared to the past, we have built more and better infrastructure, including those started by others but left unfinished. The Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway is a prime example of building better roads. [Applause] It creates wealth as the flagship of the Subic-Clark corridor.

We have built airports of international standard, upgraded domestic airports, built seaports and the Roll On/Roll Off system. I ask Congress for a Philippine Transport Security Law. [Applause]

Some say that after this SONA, it will be all politics. Sorry, but there’s more work. [Applause]

In telecommunications, I instructed the Telecommunications Commission to take action on allegations of dropped calls and missing cell phone loads. [Applause] We need to amend the Commonwealth-era Public Service Law. And we need to do it now. [Applause]

If in the past, electronics grew stronger, today we are creating wealth by developing the BPO and tourism sectors as additional engines of growth. Electronics and other manufactured exports rise and fall in accordance with the state of the world economy. But BPO remains resilient. With earnings of $ 6 billion and employment of 600,000, the BPO phenomenon speaks eloquently of our competitiveness and productivity. [Applause] Let us have a Department of ICT. [Applause]

In the last four years, tourism almost doubled. [Applause] It is now a $ 5 billion industry.

Our reforms gave us the resources to protect our people, our financial system, and our economy from the worst of shocks that the best in the West failed to anticipate. [Applause]

They gave us the resources to extend welfare support and enhance spending power.

For helping me raise government salaries through Joint Resolution 4, thank you, Congress. [Applause]

Cash handouts give the most immediate relief and produce the widest stimulating effect. 700,000 poorest families benefit from the Pantawid Pamilya program. [Applause]

We prioritize projects with the same stimulus effects plus long-term contributions to progress.

With the distribution of millions of hectares of land, 700,000 indigenous people and more than 1 million CARP beneficiaries are already landowners. [Applause] I ask Congress to pass the CARP extension immediately, [applause] and the P42 billion land reform liabilities should be condoned because only 18% has been paid since 1972. [Applause] It's timely, because it will unfreeze the rural property market. My dear father emancipated the farmers. We will now mancipate the title. [Applause]

Seven million entrepreneurs benefited from P165 billion in microfinance loans.

100,000 benefited from the Emergency Employment of our Economic Resiliency Plan. We now have with us one of them, Gigi Gabiola. Formerly a household service worker in Dubai, she now works at DOLE. Good luck, Gigi. [Applause]

1 million families have benefited from the housing and lease program, from Pag-Ibig, NHA, Community Mortgage Program, Certificates of Lot Award, and then your Loan Condonation and Restructuring Act. Thanks. [Applause]

Our average inflation is the lowest since 1966. Last June, it dropped to 1.5%. [Applause] How?

Proper policies lowered interest rates, which lowered costs to business and consumers.

Thanks to our reforms, we were able to sell NFA rice at P18.25 per kilo, even though the foreign price increased from P17.50 to P30 due to the shortage of world supply. While, for the first time, the purchase of paddy among farmers was increased, P17 from P11.

Thanks to our reforms, we have been able to invest in food — anticipating an unexpected global food crisis. We have built thousands of kilometers of farm-to-market roads and, together with the private sector, irrigated 2 million hectares. [Applause] Badjao people like Tarnati Dannawi were taught modern mariculture. He has earned up to P180,000 since last year. Congratulations, Tarnati. [Applause] We will help more fisherfolk shift to fish farming with a budget of P1 billion. [Applause]

Since the number of hungry families is increasing again, we will invest again in our Hunger Mitigation Program which in the past has proven to be effective. Help me here, Congress. [Applause]

Since 2001, we have been calling for cheaper medicine. We sell medicine at half price to thousands of Botika ng Bayan and Botika ng Barangay in many parts of the country. Our efforts prodded the pharmaceutical companies to come up with low-cost generics and brands like RiteMed. I supported the tough version of the House of the Cheaper Medicine law. [Applause] I supported it over the weak version of my critics. [Applause] The result: the drug companies volunteered to bring down drug prices, slashing by half the prices of 16 drugs. Thank you, Congressmen Cua, Alvarez, Biron, Locsin. [Applause]

Pursuant to law, we are placing other drugs under a maximum retail price. To those who want to be President, this advice: If you really want something done, just do it. Do it hard, do it well. Don’t pussyfoot. Don’t pander. And don’t say bad words in public. [Applause]

With health insurance, 86% of our population is already covered.

Under the Rent Control Law of 2005 to 2008, rent increases cannot exceed 10% annually. According to the law we signed, there is a one -year moratorium, then only up to 7% can be increased. Thank you, Congress. [Applause]

Last year, P500 each benefited more than seven million homes as Pantawid Kuryente to small electricity users.

The price of electricity, our EPIRA is the long -term answer. EPIRA dismantled monopoly. But we inherited the Power Purchase Agreements, so we have not yet achieved the full intended effect. But we are also happy, because it has only been a year. The next generation will benefit from low prices from our EPIRA. Thank you. [Applause]

Meanwhile, electricity has reached almost all barangays. We increased indigenous energy from 48% to 58%. We have saved dollars and have significantly reduced oil consumption. The huge reduction in fossil fuel is the biggest proof of energy independence and environmental responsibility. [Applause] Further reduction will come with the implementation of the Renewable Energy Act, and the Biofuels Act. Again, thank you. [Applause]

The next generation will also benefit from our lower public debt-to-GDP ratio. It declined from 78% in 2000 to 55% in 2008. We cut in half the debt of government corporations from 15% to 7%; likewise foreign debt from 73% to 32%. [Applause] If we have a big enemy that has been defeated, it is nothing but debt, your foreign debt. Those in the past conjured the demon of foreign debt. We exorcised it. [Applause]

The market grows economies. A free market, not a free-for-all.

To that end, we improved our banking system to complement its inherent conservatism. The Central Bank has been prudent. Thank you, Governor Tetangco, [applause] for being so effective. The BSP will be even more effective if Congress will amend its Charter. [Applause]

We worked on the Special Purpose Vehicle Act, reducing nonperforming loans from 18% to 4% and improving loan-deposit ratios.

Our new Securitization Law did not encourage the recklessness that brought down giant banks and insurance companies elsewhere and laid their economies to waste. In fact, it monitors and regulates the newfangled financial schemes. Thank you, Congress. [Applause]

We will work to increase tax effort through improved collections and new sin taxes to further our capacity to reduce poverty and pursue growth. Revenue enhancement must come from the Department of Finance plugging leaks and catching tax and customs cheats. I call on tax-paying citizens and tax-paying businesses: help the BIR and customs stop those cheats. [Applause]

Taxes should come from alcohol and tobacco, and not from books. Tax hazards to lungs and livers, do not tax minds. [Applause] Revenue from the alcohol and cigarette tax should be used for health and education. Fund PhilHealth premiums of the poorest. Fund more classrooms and computers.

Pardon my partiality for the teaching profession. I was a teacher, [applause] so we invested a lot in education and skills training.

Good education is the key to a better life, the great equalizer that allows every young Filipino a chance to realize their dreams.

We built 95,000 classrooms, added 60,000 teachers, allocated P1.5 billion for teacher training, especially for 100,000 English teachers. [Applause]

One of the hardest of the Millennium Development Goals is your education for everyone by 2015. That means everyone of the right age should be in primary school. Almost no country can accomplish this, but we are still trying. We have built schools in more than 1,000 barangays that previously did not have schools to save on fares for children. [Applause] We have eliminated miscellaneous fees for primary school. Public school student uniforms are no longer required.

In private high schools, we finance half of the students.

We have provided college and postgraduate education for over 600,000 scholars. One of them, Mylene Amerol-Macumbal, finished Accounting at MSU-IIT, [applause] then she went to law school, and placed second in the last bar exams [applause] —the first Muslim woman bar topnotcher. Congratulations! [Applause]

In technical education and skills training, we have invested three times that of three previous administrations combined. [Applause] Here is Jennifer Silbor, one of 10 million trainees. He learned medical transcription. Now, as an independent contractor and lecturer for transcriptions in Davao, he earns P18,000 per month. Good job, Jennifer. [Applause]

The Presidential Task Force on Education, headed by Jesuit educator Father Bienvenido Nebres, has come out with the Main Education Highway towards a Knowledge-Based Economy. It envisions seamless education from basic to vocational school or college.

It seeks to mainstream early childhood development in basic education. Our children are our most cherished possession. In their early years we must make sure they get a healthy start in life. They must receive the right food for a healthy body, the right education for a bright and inquiring mind — and the equal opportunity for a meaningful job. [Applause]

For college admission, the Task Force recommends mandatory Scholastic Aptitude Tests. It also recommends that higher private education institutions and state universities and colleges should be harmonized, and also that CHED should oversee local universities and colleges. For professions seeking international recognition — engineering, architecture, accountancy, pharmacy, and physical therapy — the Task Force recommends radical reform: 10 years of basic education, 2 years of pre-university, before 3 years of university.

Our educational system should make the Filipino fit not just for whatever jobs happen to be on offer today, but also for whatever economic challenge life will throw in their way.

Through hardship and comfort, our overseas Filipinos are strengthening our country. Their remittance of $ 16 billion last year is a record. This year, even higher. [Applause]

I know that this is not a sacrifice joyfully borne. This is work where it can be found — in faraway places, among strangers with different cultures. It is lonely work, it is hard work.

So we are trying to create good -paying jobs here, so that overseas work will just be a career choice, not the only option for a hardworking Filipino. [Applause]

Meanwhile, we should make their sacrifices worthwhile. We must create more effective protection and expansion of the value of their hard -earned wages. That means stronger consumer protection for overseas Filipinos investing in property and products back home. For them, we are mobilizing the Investors Protection Task Force. [Applause]

I do not hesitate to visit our people and their hosts around the world — from Japan to Brazil, from Europe and the Middle East to the American Midwest, listen to their problems and needs, find out how our government can help them— by working out better policies on migrant labor, or by saving lives and restoring liberty.

When I went to Saudi, King Abdullah pardoned 700 OFWs who were in prison. [Applause] They filled an entire plane and went home with me. [Applause]

From our State Visit to Spain, it has become our biggest European donor. [Applause] And King Juan Carlos is talking to other countries for our troubled OFWs. So did Sheikh Khalifa, the Prime Minister of Bahrain. [Applause]

When I went to Kuwait, Emir Al-Sabah commuted death sentences. [Applause] We thank all our leaders, all the world leaders, who have shown compassion for our overseas Filipino workers. Thanks a lot. [Applause]

Our vigorous international engagement has helped bring in foreign investment. Net foreign direct investments multiplied 15 times during our administration. Along with our OFWs, they more than doubled our foreign exchange reserves. Our peso strengthened and a sharp rise in prices was avoided. They upgraded our credit because while the reserves of our peers have shrunk this past year, our reserves grew by $ 3 billion. [Applause]

Our international engagement has also corrected historical injustice. The day we visited Washington, Senator Daniel Inouye successfully sponsored benefits for our veterans as part of America’s stimulus package.

I have accepted the invitation of President Obama to be the first Southeast Asian leader to meet him at the White House, later this week. [Applause]

That he sought out the Philippines testifies to our strong and deep ties.

High on our agenda will be peace and security issues. Terrorism: how to meet it, how to end it, how to address its roots in injustice and prejudice — and first and always how to protect lives.

We will discuss nuclear nonproliferation. The Philippines will chair the review of the Nuclear Weapons Nonproliferation Treaty in New York in May 2010. The success of the talks will be a major diplomatic achievement for us.

There is a range of other issues we will discuss, including the global challenge of climate change, especially the threat to countries with long coastlines. And there is the global recession, its worse impact on poor people, and the options that can spare them from the worst.

In 2008 up to the first quarter of 2009, we stood among only a few economies in Asia Pacific that did not shrink. [Applause] Compare this to 2001, when some of my current critics were driven out by People Power. Asia was then surging but our country was on the brink of bankruptcy. [Applause]

Since then, our economy posted uninterrupted growth for 33 quarters; more than doubled its size from $ 76 billion to $ 186 billion. The average GDP growth from 2001 to the first quarter of 2009 is the highest in 43 years. [Applause]

The number of those who say they are poor dropped to 47% from 59%. Although our population has grown, the number of the poor has decreased by 2 million. [Applause] GNP per capita rose from a Third World $ 967 to $ 2,000. We create 8 million jobs, an average of a million a year — much, much more than at any other time. [Applause]

In sum:

First, we have a strong economy and a strong fiscal position to withstand political shocks.

Second, we built new and modern infrastructure and completed unfinished ones.

Third, the economy is more fair to the poor than ever before. [Applause]

Fourth, we are building a sound base for the next generation.

Fifth, international authorities have taken notice that we are safer from environmental degradation and man-made disasters.

As a country in the path of typhoons and in the Pacific Rim of Fire, we must be prepared as the latest technology permits to anticipate natural calamities when that is possible; to extend immediate and effective relief when it is not. The mapping of flood- and landslide-prone areas is almost complete. Early warning, forecasting, and monitoring systems have been improved, with weather tracking facilities in Subic, Tagaytay, Mactan, Mindanao, Pampanga.

We have worked on flood control infrastructure like those for Pinatubo, Agno, Laoag, and Abucay, which will pump the run off waters from Quezon City and Tondo flooding Sampaloc. This will help relieve hundreds of hectares in this old city of its age-old woe. [Applause]

Those in Camanava continue, in addition to Pinatubo, Iloilo, Pasig-Marikina, Bicol River Basin, and the river basins of Mindanao.

The victims of typhoon Frank in Panay should receive their long-overdue assistance package. I ask Congress to pass the SNITS Law. [Applause]

We have inherited the longest Communist rebellion in the world.

Leah de la Cruz was one of twelve thousand rebel returnees. He was only sixteen when he joined the NPA. Became a member of the regional White Area Committee, was promoted to Leyte Party Committee Secretary. Caught in 2006. She is now involved in an LGU-supported handicraft livelihood training of former rebels. We love you, Leah! [Applause]

There is now a good prospect for peace talks with both the Communist Party of the Philippines and the MILF, with whom we are now on ceasefire. [Applause]

We inherited an age-old conflict in Mindanao, exacerbated by a politically popular but nearsighted policy of massive retaliation. This only provoked the other side to continue the war.

In these two internal conflicts, ang tanong ay hindi, “Sino ang mananalo?” kundi, “Bakit pa ba kailangang maglaban ang kapwa Pilipino tungkol sa mga isyu na alam naman nating lahat na di malulutas sa dahas, at mareresolba lang sa paraang demokratiko?” [Applause]

There is nothing more that I would wish for than peace in Mindanao. It will be a blessing for all its people: Muslim, Christian, and Lumads. It will show other religiously divided communities that there can be common ground on which to live together in peace, harmony, and cooperation that respects each other’s religious beliefs. [Applause]

At sa lahat ng dako ng bansa, kailangan nating protektahan ang ating mga mamamayan kontra sa krimen—in their homes, in their neighborhoods, in their communities. How shall crime be fought? With the five pillars of justice, including crime fighters; we call on Congress to fund more policemen on the streets. [Applause]

Real government is about looking beyond the vested to the national interest, setting up the necessary conditions to enable the next, more enabled, and more empowered generation to achieve a country as prosperous, a people as content, as ours deserve to be. [Applause]

The noisiest critics of constitutional reform tirelessly and shamelessly attempted Cha-Cha when they thought they could take advantage of a shift in the form of government. Now that they feel they cannot benefit from it, they oppose it. [Applause]

As the seeds of fundamental political reform are planted, let us address the highest exercise of democracy—voting!

In 2001, I said we would finance fully automated elections. We got it, thanks to Congress. [Applause]

At the end of this speech I shall step down from this stage, but not from the Presidency. [Applause] My term does not end until next year. [Applause] Until then, I will fight for the ordinary Filipino. The nation comes first. There is much to do as Head of State — to the very last day. [Applause]

A year is a long time. Investment continues in the so -called three E’s of the economy, environment, and education. There are many perils that we must still guard against.

A man-made calamity is already upon us, global in scale. As I said earlier, so far we have been spared its worst effects but we cannot be complacent. We only know that we have generated more resources on which to draw, and thereby created options we could take. Thank God we did not let our critics stop us. [Applause]

As the campaign unfolds and the candidates take to the airwaves, I ask them to talk more about how they will build up the nation rather than tear down their opponents. [Applause] Give the electorate real choices and not just sweet talk. [Applause]

Meanwhile, I will keep a steady hand on the tiller, keeping the ship of state away from the shallows some prefer, and steering it straight on the course we set in 2001.

Our people are hardworking and godly. These qualities are epitomized in someone like Manny Pacquiao. [Applause] Manny trained tirelessly, by the book, with iron discipline, with the certain knowledge that he had to fight himself, his weaknesses first, before he could beat his opponent. [Applause] That was the way to clinch his victories and his ultimate title: the greatest boxer in history. [Applause] Long live you, Manny! [Applause]

However much a President wishes it, a national problem cannot be knocked out with a single punch. A president must work with the problem as much as against it, turn it into a solution if she can.

There isn’t a day I don’t work at my job, or a waking moment when I don’t think through a work-related problem. Even my critics cannot begrudge the long hours I put in. Our people deserve a government that works just as hard as they do. [Applause]

A President must be on the job 24/7, ready for any contingency, any crisis, anywhere, anytime.

Everything right can be undone by even a single wrong. Every step forward must be taken in the teeth of political pressures and economic constraints that could push you two steps back — if you flinch and falter. I have not flinched, I have not faltered. I did not back down from the challenge. [Applause]

And I have never done any of the things that scared my worst critics so much. They are frightened by their own shadows. [Applause]

In the face of attempted coups, I issued emergency proclamations just in case. But I was able to resolve these military crises with the ordinary powers of my office. My critics call it dictatorship. I call it determination. [Applause]

We know it as strong government, but I never declared martial law, [applause] though they are running scared as if I did. In truth, what they are really afraid of is their weakness in the face of this self-imagined threat. [Applause]

I say to them: Do not tell us what we all know, that democracy can be threatened. Tell us what you will do when it is attacked. [Applause]

I know what to do:

As I have shown, I will defend democracy with arms when it is threatened by violence; with firmness when it is weakened by division; with law and order when it is subverted by anarchy; and always, I will try to sustain it by wise policies of economic progress, so that a democracy means not just an empty liberty but a full life for all. [Applause]

I have never expressed the desire to extend myself beyond my term. [Applause] Many of those who accuse me of it tried to cling like nails to their posts. [Applause]

I am accused of misgovernance. Many of those who accuse me of it left me the problem of their misgovernance to solve. [Applause] And we did it.

I am falsely accused, without proof, of using my position for personal profit. Many who accuse me have lifestyles and spending habits that make them walking proofs of that crime. [Applause]

We can read their frustrations. They had the chance to serve this good country and they blew it by serving themselves. [Applause]

Those who live in glass houses should cast no stones. Those who should be in jail should not threaten it, especially if they have been there. [Applause]

Our administration, with the highest average rate of growth, recording multiple increases in investments, with the largest job creation in history, and which gets a credit upgrade at the height of a world recession, must be doing something right, [applause] even if some of those cocooned in corporate privilege refuse to recognize it. [Applause]

Governance, however, is not about looking back and getting even. It is about looking forward and giving more — to the people who gave us the greatest, hardest gift of all: the care of a country. [Applause]

From Bonifacio at Balintawak to Cory Aquino at EDSA and up to today, we have struggled to bring power to the people, and this country to the eminence it deserves.

Today the Philippines is weathering well the storm that is raging around the world. It is growing stronger with the challenge. When the weather clears, as it will, there is no telling how much farther forward it can go. Believe in it. I believe. [Applause]

We can and we must march forward with hope, optimism, and determination.

We must come together, work together, and walk together toward the future. [Applause]

Although we have great challenges ahead of us, we have great capabilities in our hands. [Applause] Let us work together to ensure the worthy future of our Motherland. [Applause]

And to the people of our good country, for allowing me to serve as your President: Maraming salamat. [Applause] [Standing ovation]

Long live the Philippines! [Applause] [Standing ovation]