Thank you.
Thank you, Speaker of Venice. Congratulations, Senate President Manny Villar; Vice President Noli de Castro; President Ramos; Chief Justice Panganiban; Members of the diplomatic corps; senators; congressmen and congresswomen; other officials, ladies and gentlemen.
On this day, our minds are focused on our compatriots in Lebanon. They are now in the grip of the horrific escalation of war. Just yesterday, we met the first 200 Filipinos who fled there; We will take 500 more home in the next four days.
To our OFWs, you are truly new heroes. Thank you so much for your service to the family, to our people, and to God.
To our countrymen, a journey of a thousand miles does not begin with a single step. It starts with the first step, with gathering the means to complete it successfully. Those means are now at hand.
To my friends in Congress who, in the face of grave political consequences, championed and passed some of the most severe and critical fiscal reforms to save our economy, thank you very much. You are the true friends of the Filipino people. For the real challenge has never been to blame but to fix what is wrong in our country and our economy.
Because of you, we finally have the funds, not only to pay interest, but for education, better bridges and roads, providing health care and more jobs in our country. Now, we have the money to pay down our debt and to build up our country.
To the civil servants who rose to the challenge of turning a weakening economy into a strong republic, through more vigorous tax collection and more vigilant action against corruption, many thanks. We have achieved record revenue collections. We are lining up corrupt officials to face the consequences of their misdeeds. And finally earned the respect of the international community as a serious and viable state for our fiscal discipline and billions of pesos in annual interest savings that are now going into necessary public investments.
To our men and women in the armed services, the huge and deep core of your loyalty has earned the nation’s accolade. The few mutineers have been condemned by the people. They and their partisan cohorts and funders are being brought to justice. To the many soldiers and police who upheld the flag and the Constitution, many thanks.
And at a time when we must each, as individuals and as communities, take greater responsibility, our local government officials man the frontline of change: change for greater accountability, for better service, and more responsiveness to their constituents. To all of you, local government officials, thank you very much.
Most of all, thank you to the Filipino people, for your sacrifices, for your perseverance, for believing, in the face of the greatest hardships, in our ability to surmount the obstacles to the future you deserve; you who have resisted persistent if not pathetic calls for despair instead of faith, for anarchy instead of harmony, thank you, thank you, heartfelt thank you.
So I stand before you today to deliver a state of the nation that is focused on what the people want; the people want to know the plan to put us on the path to prosperity.
I am not here to talk about politics; I am here to talk about what the people want; details on the state of the nation and what their government is doing to make progress every single day.
Together we will advance the country towards a brighter future.
As can be seen in this graph, due to our economic reform, we now have the funds to address social inequity and economic disparity. Too many, too many, the people are starving. I will not stop until our fight against poverty is won.
We now have the funds to stamp out terrorism and lawless violence.
We already have the funds to fight corruption.
Our reforms have earned us P1 billion from the U.S. Millennium Challenge Account for more investigators, prosecutors, and new technology to fight corruption. We are matching this with another billion from our fiscal savings.
We now have the funds for constitutional and electoral changes. In the current system, the process is very slow, and open to intense competition, and the province and the people are shaken by the rule of Imperial Manila. It is time to restore power to the people and the province. For surely, there must be a better way to do politics, so that those who lose elections do not make the country pay for their frustrated ambitions. There must be a better way so that those who win the nation’s mandate to govern can work without delay and whimsical obstruction. There must be a better way.
Meanwhile, now we can fund the Medium Term Public Investment Program. Our three -phase plan is moving forward. First, to get out of decades of debt and lack of funds. We have already done this. Second stage, the return to the people of greater government revenue: to be able to establish the health care, education, and employment that the people desperately need. We are already doing this. And finally, phase three: to invest in the natural advantages and natural resources of each section of our nation so that when harnessed together, the major economic regions of the nation are larger than the sum of its parts.
We will enhance the competitive advantage of the natural “super regions” of the Philippines: the North Luzon Agribusiness Quadrangle, the Metro Luzon Urban Beltway, Central Philippines, Mindanao, and the Cyber ​​Corridor.
In North Luzon, we will prioritize agribusiness investments. The agricultural and fisheries potential of the Cordilleras, Ilocandia, and Cagayan Valley can feed Luzon affordably. And nearness to North Asia holds the rich promise of agricultural exports and tourism.
My father built the Halsema Highway from Baguio to Bontoc, and the Bagabag airport in Nueva Vizcaya to access the Ifugao rice terraces, which by the way, the UNESCO has recently praised for the way we have carried out our heritage preservation policy. We have rehabilitated the Baguio to Mount Data leg of the highway and the rest of Halsema will now follow. We will upgrade the Bagabag airport and build a new one in Lallo, Cagayan, which will connect to Cordillera by upgrading the Tabuk-Tuguegarao Road.
In Tabuk, Kalinga, in April, some elders received land titles, after waiting 20 years since the government and the Cordillera People’s Liberation Army signed the Mount Data Accord. There was an old man, wearing the old CPLA uniform. Line up, dragging a young man. He said, "This is not for me but for him." Immediately reached the title of grandson. Here now is Mr. Father Balunggay and his grandson Jacob.
And our postharvest support shall continue, like the cold chain that we set up in 2004 for La Trinidad, Benguet, under Mayor Nestor Fongwan. It consisted of a refrigerated storage facility and refrigerated trucks to deliver vegetables to Metro Manila. I wanted the income of the farmers to increase, and the mother of every household to be able to buy cheap and fresh vegetables for her children.
So that the people will know how well their money is spent, Benguet and its towns of Bakun, Bokod, and Itogon have rolled out the new electronic government accounting system in their jurisdictions.
Ifugao was able to cut its poverty in half in the first three years of our administration, from 56% to 28%. Congratulations. We hope that through these programs, the other provinces can replicate the success of Ifugao. We want more Cordillerans in the professions that the people look up to, such as lawyers Maurice Domogan and Romeo Brawner. We also want the Cordillera to be able to prepare for autonomy when it comes to federalism, in accordance with the amendment of the Constitution.
In Dagupan, colleges such as Northwestern Lyceum University have launched a ladderized system of education. In this system, courses taken in vocational school and work experience are available at the university.
We will expand President Ramos ’flagship San Roque Multipurpose Dam with the massive Agno River Project. Another major project is the Banaoang Irrigation. We allocate P200 million a month for small irrigation projects like those in the flood control plan of the Region II Development Council headed by Bishop Ramon Villena. Plus another P200 million a month for farm-to-market roads.
Also in the works is an international airport in Poro, La Union, and the improvement of the two airports in Batanes as recommended by Governor Vic Gato. Ilocos Sur will have a seaport in Salomague, while the Cagayan Zone Authority will better the one in Port Irene.
To save dollars, windmills in Batanes and Ilocos Norte turn megawinds into megawatts. When Army Commander Romy Tolentino was North Luzon commander, he became a soldier-farmer, planting jatropha as yet another alternative fuel.
The Metro Luzon Urban Beltway spans most of Central Luzon, Metro Manila, Calabarzon, Mindoro, and Marinduque. It must be a globally competitive urban, industrial, and services center because it produces more than half of the country’s GDP.
To be world-class we invest in five comprehensive strategies for global competitiveness: (1) Make food plentiful and affordable to keep our labor cost globally competitive; (2) Reduce the cost of electricity to make our factories regionally competitive; (3) Modernize infrastructure at least cost to efficiently transport goods and people; (4) Mobilize, upgrade, and disseminate knowledge and technologies for productivity; and (5) Reduce red tape in all agencies to cut business costs.
The most prohibitive red tape is in our outmoded Constitution. We need Constitutional change to bring our rules of investment into the new millennium.
The new public bidding process has been shortened to 45 days for infrastructure, and 26 days for supplies, as of today. Even before this, Metro Manila firms paying bribes for public contracts declined from 57% in 2003 to 46% today. Congratulations, Metro Manila.
Machine-readable electronic passports will enhance the credibility of Philippine travel documents, improve mobility, and increase the prospects of Philippine business and labor.
Legitimate mobility is hampered by human trafficking. Through the support of the USAID, we have convicted human traffickers with the Tongco spouses who were sentenced in a Quezon City court last December. These accomplishments removed us from the from the priority antitrafficking watchlist.
To lower power costs we introduced the Wholesale Electricity Spot Market last month. Let’s give it a chance to work. And we would like big power consumers like electronics, our number one export, to avail of lower power rates from the National Power Corporation. On coco-biodiesel, we now have enough capacity for the proposed 1% blend just waiting to be passed into law.
The Subic-Clark corridor is on its way to a competitive international logistics center. This will be my legacy to my cabalens, jointly with Lito and Mark Lapid, Rey Aquino, Ana Bondoc, Blue Boy Nepomuceno, my son Mikey and Tarzan Lazatin. We jumpstarted it with giant investments in the Subic Seaport, the Clark Airport, and the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Expressway.
And to bring the beltway to the west we will connect the Subic-Clark-Tarlac Road to Dingalan Port through Nueva Ecija, and the Marikina- Infanta Road to the port of Real.
To alleviate the fatigue of the employees massaging the traffic in Metro Manila, we will invest in expressways and trains.
We will have a continuous highway from Clark to Metro Manila to Batangas Port. Finish your expressway from Clark to Manila. So far it is less than an hour’s drive from Clark to Monument. Now we will avoid traffic from Monumento, as we will be connecting the North Expressway to the C-5. Sonny Belmonte will help right-of-way. The C-5 is already connected to the South Luzon Expressway. The South Luzon Expressway will be widened to Calamba. In August, it will be extended to Batangas. We will also build the Coastal Road to Bacoor, which has become urban under Jesse Castillo.
We will connect the MRT and LRT from Monumento to North EDSA to make the trip around Manila, and ease traffic. We will construct the Northrail to Clark and the Southrail to Lucena and on to Bicol, and upgrade the link between them. We will also extend the LRT to Bacoor. With the speed of travel to and from Metro Manila, workers will be able to live in a cheaper and more comfortable province.
The railroad atmosphere on the South Superhighway is fine. The families that Vice President Noli de Castro and I have served are happy with their new and permanent relocation. Teddy Boy Locsin said it hadn’t been done before, and couldn’t be done at all. Well, Teddy?
Now it will be done in Manila, Lito Atienza will take care of it.
We thank China for agreeing to fund these housing needs. The Iglesia ni Kristo and Gawad Kalinga projects are a model for our housing program for the poor.
But the people of the West Zone of Manila are short of water. So we will give priority not only to education, electricity, energy, and health, but also to water. We are setting up a 300 million liter per day pumping station for Muntinlupa, Las Piñas and Parañaque.
We will build a roll-on-roll-off port system to link Lucena, Quezon, to Boac, Marinduque, like the Batangas-Mindoro RORO.
With such projects, we will strengthen the economy of the barangays and provinces. And we will end the long oppression of barangays by rebel terrorists who kill without qualms, even their own. In the provinces covered by the 7th Division, Jovito Palparan is struggling. He will not retreat until the communities disappear in the night of terror and rise to the dawn of justice and freedom.
In the harshest possible terms I condemn political killings. We together stopped judicial executions with the abolition of the death penalty. We urge witnesses to come forward. Together we will stop extrajudicial executions.
Central Philippines has the competitive edge in tourism in its natural wonders and the extraordinary hospitality of its people. The area sweeps across Palawan and Romblon, the Visayas and Bicol, plus the northern Mindanao islands of Camiguin, Siargao, and Dapitan. Topbilled by Boracay, Cebu, Bohol, and Palawan, it attracts more than half of the foreign tourists to the Philippines. It is also the center of geothermal power in the country, which we continue to develop.
The priority here is tourism investments. Coming soon for superstar Boracay are an instrument landing system for the Kalibo airport and a P3 billion private investment in a San Jose, Romblon, airport, plus good roads to spillover destinations all over Panay.
In Cebu, Gwen Garcia is constructing a world-class convention center for the ASEAN and East Asian Summits in December.
Helping our infrastructure upgrading is the fall in bribery for public sector contracts in Metro Cebu, from 62% of companies in 2004 to 47% today. Congratulations to Cardinal Vidal for shepherding his flock and to Metro Cebu Mayors Osmeña, Ouano, and Fernandez, and Metro Cebu representatives del Mar, Cuenco, Gullas, and Soon-Ruiz.
Bohol became a destination distinct from Cebu since it defeated the terrorist insurgency with community initiatives led by the power tandem of Rico Aumentado and General Johnny Gomez, now the NCR Commander. It now merits its own international airport, just as our country deserves a world-class Constitution strongly supported by Governor Aumentado and the league of local authorities.
Tourism in Palawan requires the upgrading of the airports of Puerto Princesa, Busuanga, San Vicente (hometown of Congressman Alvarez that’s why he’s clapping) and the building of a new one in Balabac; as well as a continuous road backbone from El Nido to Bataraza.
We will lengthen the Dumaguete runway for tourism as well as electronics. Valencia, Negros Oriental, could attract semiconductor firms with power rates subsidized by the geothermal field of Palimpinon. Negros will also advance energy independence with ethanol projects in San Carlos City and Tamlang Valley once the biofuel law is passed. (You have done your part, Migs.)
We will serve Guimaras by the airport being built in Santa Barbara, Iloilo, and by a new RORO port in Sibunag. We will link Sipalay via Silay airport funded by the national government and Kabankalan airport being built by its local government. Thank you.
For Bicol’s whale sharks, beaches and, of course, Mount Mayon, we have started acquiring the right of way for an international airport in Daraga, Albay. We will provide the means to the perfect surfs of the Pacific by upgrading the airports of Siargao, Guiuan, and Tacloban.
We will widen the road to Dakak in Dapitan, and RORO will connect Siquijor to Santander, Cebu; Camiguin to Jagna, Bohol; Ubay, Bohol, to Maasin, Southern Leyte, for diving in Limasawa.
We will bring Masbate and Biliran into the RORO Eastern Nautical Highway from Surigao through Leyte through Naval and Maripipi in Biliran through Esperanza, Aroroy, and Burias Island in Masbate and on to Bicol. The much-awaited 10-megawatt generator set arrived in Masbate last Saturday. It is ready to power up the province before the end of the month.
Camiguin, Romblon, and Camarines Norte got out of the list of poorest provinces in 2003. With tourism these provinces can become rich.
Also winning the war against poverty and calamity, undaunted by unimaginable catastrophe, the valiant people of Southern Leyte, under the leadership of Rosette Lerias and Oging Mercado (our Rudy Guliani) are rebuilding the lives of Saint Bernard and San Francisco from their tragic mudslides. Yesterday, I asked the Japanese government to help Southern Leyte implement an integrated management approach to deal with their critical ecosystem, like the one the World Bank has approved for the Bicol River Basin.
Mindanao is our priority for agribusiness investments in the south. Mindanao is mostly fertile and largely typhoon-free, exporting coconut products and high-value crops, and from its waters come 40% of the country’s fish catch. Our investment priorities mirror those for North Luzon and more because Mindanao has the poorest regions and poorest provinces and because we have to spend on a logistics system linking it to the north.
In 2003 we introduced the RORO from Zamboanga del Norte through Negros, Panay, and Mindoro to Batangas. This system has slashed travel time from Mindanao to Luzon from 36 hours to 24 hours, and freight cost by 30%, so crucial to food shipments. Now we will develop more routes like the one from Cagayan de Oro through Camiguin, Bohol, Cebu, and Masbate to Bicol, the Central Nautical Highway.
Also in 2003, Sulu, Lanao del Sur, and Tawi-Tawi registered double-digit declines in poverty incidence from the year 2000. Congratulations.
The growth of the islands of Sulu, Basilan, and Tawi-Tawi is obvious. Jollibee opens in Basilan. The Balikatan exercises with the United States, combined with the U.S. GEM program and other donor-assisted projects, have no doubt contributed to this.
In Sulu, one day in May, it was raining, a long struggle ended when soldiers and civilians entered Kampong Bitan-ag in Panamao held by the rebels. The two sides hugged and shook hands. Because of Marine General Ben Dolorfino’s intense desire for peace, reconciliation took place. Thus ended a bloody chapter. Congratulations, General Ben Dolorfino.
The key to any improvement is the strong support and capable leadership of the local government. For example, the “from arms to farms” of Governor Ben Loong of Sulu, with his caravan of tractors literally invading former rebel camps in his province. Congratulations.
More than a week ago, hundreds of rebels and their families arrived in the “Eleven Islands,” led by former MNLF Commander Aribari Samson. Here in the islands known as “no man’s island” rebels and criminals used to hide. Today with the help of a United Nations program, we have built 200 homes and new lives for Samson’s group. Thank you for giving peace a chance. Congratulations, Commander Samson.
I take this occasion to express our gratitude to the donor community from the U.S., the Organization of the Islamic Conference [OIC], and the European Union, Australia, Japan, our ASEAN neighbors, the multilaterals, and the rest of the world. Thank you for helping us in our peace process.
If we can harness the forces of good in our nation, the positive force at work here at home and those from abroad such as the US, Malaysia, the OIC, and others, we shall prevail in Mindanao with a peace agreement that brings freedom and hope to all Filipinos. With this peace, we would reap dividends in resources invested in agribusiness, not aggression, to build up, not tear down, the Philippine south.
Among the possible peace dividends would be pro-poor road projects like the Siocon-Sirawai-Sibuco-Baligyan Road in Zamboanga del Norte; the Lebak to Maguindanao which Sim Datumanong started when he was Secretary of Public Works; the Dinagat Island road network in Surigao Del Norte; the Hawilian-Salug-Sinakungan barangay road in Agusan del Sur; the Pangil Bay Bridge; and the Surigao-Davao Road, which we want to be as beautiful as the Bukidnon Highway completed during the administration of Joe Zubiri and the term of Migs Zubiri.
Mindanao’s number one export, coconuts, has been growing continuously for the last three years, at the rate of 10% a year. The coconut farmers deserve a portion of the peace dividend. I invite Congress and the Bishops-Ulama-Priests-Pastors-Farmer-Lumad Conference led by Archbishop Fernando Capalla to help me ensure their rightful share.
On top of peace and investment, progress also demands good governance. I congratulate Donkoy Emano for the drop in reports of corruption for public contracts in Cagayan de Oro from 65% of firms last year to 38 this year. Also Rudy Duterte and the other leaders of Metro Davao led by Majority Leader Boy Nograles for a similar drop, 57% last year to 49 now. Things are coming together for Mindanao, a prelude to their readiness for eventual federalism.
The Cyber ​​Corridor will boost telecommunications, technology and education. The corridor runs the length of all the super regions, from Baguio to Cebu to Davao. The cities of Davao, Tagum and Samal Island Garden all operate electronic government accounting systems. There are many wings now to the corridor because enterprising local executives like L-Ray Villafuerte and Jerry Trenas have aggressively attracted call centers to their jurisdictions. (Congratulations, Jerry.) In this corridor, the English and information and communication technology [ICT] skills of the youth give them a competitive edge in call centers and other business process outsourcing [BPO].
In 2001, in this hall, we hailed ICT as a key growth sector. So we built up telecommunications infrastructure and opened the market for Internet phone calls. Today international calls cost 6 cents a minute, down from 40 cents. From 2,000 BPO workers in 2001, we now have 200,000.
I had coffee with some call center agents last Labor Day. Lyn, a new college graduate, told me, “Now I don’t have to leave the country in order for me to help my family. Thank you." I was so touched, Lyn, by your comments. With these structural reforms, we not only found jobs, but kept families intact. Thank God, I thought, or someone might also try to impeach me for violating Article 15 of the Constitution on the solidarity of the family as the foundation of the nation.
As Louie Villafuerte argues, to step into the future, a country that wants to be a player in the global economy needs bold and well-funded research and development initiatives of its own. To this end, we will continuously increase the budget for science and technology and education. For in today’s global economy, knowledge is the greatest creator of wealth.
In summary, I named only a few priorities to illustrate that on many fronts, your government is working, and working well. Our economy is now growing over the longest period in the last quarter-century: 22 consecutive quarters of growth. The income of the poorest families rose by more than 30% in the first three years of our tenure, and the number of the poor dropped to 25% of families, from 28%, equivalent to 2 million people freed from poverty. According to Thornton and Punongbayan, 70% of medium-sized business owners are optimistic, the fifth most optimistic among 30 countries, just behind India, Ireland, South Africa, and China.
Bickering in politics may delay, but not derail, the initiatives that need to be taken on our pro-poor, pro-growth, and pro-peace agenda. Regardless of the fate of the national budget, we must automate our election process. Local governments must get their rightful share of revenues. I ask Congress to pass a supplemental budget to effect this.
We are a great people. We have honest students and honest cops. We have scaled the heights of Mount Everest, dominated the Southeast Asian games, we have won international beauty titles, and of course punched our way to triumph in the boxing world. Our people compete and win every day in every imaginable job throughout the world. Individually, we’ve taken the world on and won; together, we must take on the challenge of creating a new, peaceful, humane, and competitive nation and prevail.
For those who want to pick up old fights, we’re game but what a waste of time. Why not join hands instead? Join hands in the biggest challenge of all, where we all win or we all lose: the battle for the survival and progress of our one and only country.
After 3 years, 11 months, and 6 days, I shall relinquish the Presidency, with much if not all that I have outlined completed. I do not want it said then that, in the end, I defeated my enemies. I would rather have it said that all of us, you and I, friends and foes today, achieved together a country progressive, prosperous, and united.
Thank you. Long live!