Thank you Speaker de Venecia.
Vice President Guingona; President Ramos; Senate President Drilon; Chief Justice Davide and the Associate Justices of the Supreme Court; distinguished members of the Senate and House of Representatives; His Excellency Archbishop Franco and excellencies of the diplomatic corps; members of the Cabinet; General Abaya and the officers of the Armed Forces; General Ebdane and the members of the police; fellow workers in government; ladies and gentlemen.
Yesterday, without bloodshed, without damage to property, and within a single day, we overcame an ill-conceived mutiny carried out by misguided military officers. Such actions are deplorable and will be met with the full force of the law, including their political component. Yet they signal an underlying problem that we must address.
I am constituting an independent commission to investigate the roots of the mutiny and the provocations that inspired it. At the request of Defense Secretary Angelo Reyes, I am also constituting an independent commission to investigate the Davao bombing.
These will be matched by a PNP Reform Commission. I thank the National Police for their solid support in yesterday's crisis, and I am sure they themselves welcome a comprehensive reform that will cure the organization not only of the failures of the scale of the Al-Ghozi escape, but also the daily devils that are the kotong cops.
By now, we should be at peace: at peace in the south, at peace in the countryside, safe in our homes and secure in our communities. But we remain at war — at war against terrorism; at war against corruption; at war against disease; at war against drugs — the greatest menace facing our country today.
Last five weeks, we’ve struck a major blow against the drug menace. Eight billion pesos in five weeks. It is a pity that a few days later after the penultimate success against the drug menace, we should find ourselves at war against destabilizers.
We cannot stay divided with so much we need to do together. I address myself not only to the joint houses here assembled, but to the nation-at-large.
I need you; we need each other.
That is what I said when I took office as president in 2001. I said then that it was time for healing in our society.
And in my first State of the Nation Address, I emphasized the basic aspirations of the average Filipino: work, food at every table, home, education.
I gave my targets.
I am submitting to the Congress and to the nation a technical report of my government’s performance. In sum I can say, we delivered in great part on our commitments. Less than two months after the State of the Nation Address, on 9/11, the world changed. to the basic goals of work, food at every table, home, and education, we add peace.
But since our republic is not yet stable, we cannot yet expect that if a president orders like a president of a corporation, the institutions and bureaucracy will understand and follow immediately. In a nation whose institutions are still fragile, a leader cannot run a developing country like a corporation.
For the practical purposes of most people, government exists to provide jobs, homes, education, peace, food on every table. And to do that adequately and dependably, government must possess the capacity to execute good policy and deliver basic services through strong and responsive institutions staffed by a competent and dedicated bureaucracy. In short, government must be the arm of a strong republic.
But a strong republic does not happen overnight; not even in two or three years. Nor does it happen once and for all.
In this setting, the first virtue of a modern leader is a constant sense of correct perspective, the capacity to retain her original focus, and plod on regardless. She must stick to priorities that were carefully chosen, rather than dump them at every first issue that is recklessly raised. I have stuck to my priorities: jobs, food on every table, homes, education, peace.
Many of our reforms have yet to bear fruit, but in the fullness of time our country will reap what was carefully picked, planted, and nurtured. And it will be a harvest of plenty.
The harvest has in fact started.
In peace:
We have hit hard at terrorism and, with the help of Speaker Joe de Venecia, made advances towards a negotiated peace on two fronts: the MILF and the NDF.
Next week, talks between the government and MILF peace panels will begin towards a final peace agreement. We will avail of the good offices of Malaysia in the search of a political solution to the conflict with the MILF, while looking to the help of the United States in the rehabilitation of conflict areas and the eradication of the roots of war. We — all of us Filipinos — have to decide now, once and for all, whether we want peace or we want war. There is no way to peace. Peace is the way. But if some enemies of our republic insist on war, I can do nothing if they are not honest to defend our countrymen.
I thank the senate for ratifying seven UN conventions against terrorism. I asked them to ratify the remaining five. I also urge congress to pass the Anti-Terrorism Law, and include in it the imposition of heavy penalties for negligence in the care of suspected terrorists.
Along with terrorism, the drug problem, is at the root of the intense concern of citizens about their personal safety. The corruption created by the drug trade is deep and pervasive in all sectors. We must hate the reckless destruction of the lives of our citizens that could lead to the destruction of our democratic institutions.
When I talk to the parents of drug addicts, my heart breaks, but I am even more reassured that my decision to raise the level of our resistance to the drug was right. I will take this battle to every province and city until it reaches the barangays so that we can knock on the doors of every Filipino family. This is one fight I am taking everywhere, if we have to knock on every door. We will launch a campaign in schools and communities to save the youth and give new life to drug users and make sure they don’t drown again! We will squeeze the supply on the street in such a way that even the poor will find it difficult to sustain their vice. We will cripple the operation of drug lords and their godparents in the corridors of power.
I thank Congress for passing the Anti-Money Laundering Lawbecause it will help us interdict the money of the drug lords. I am now instructing the Secretary of Budget and Management to allocate a hundred million pesos for its implementation.
This is our battle and we will win. For the big fish on illegal drugs, it is already difficult to moratorium on the death penalty. But in other things, I’m still pro-life. I will veto any bill that will try to smuggle in abortion.
About education:
In 2001, I said that our English literacy gives us a competitive edge in ICT. I also said that to prepare the youth to be the next generation of knowledge workers, we will upgrade math and science teaching in basic education. So we increased the time for math and English and enhanced the science content in the new curriculum. We built schools in 600 barangays that previously did not have schools. We are starting a distance learning program or education TV for four hundred communities that are far away and lack teachers.
And like Senate President Franklin Drilon, join me in building a classroom in all schools with more than 100 students per room. In that way, we can once and for all close the perennial school building gap.
About accommodation:
We have built over 100,000 houses for the poor and nearly 200,000 for the workers. We have also guaranteed land on which nearly 300,000 poor families live. We have adopted the ancestral domain of the indigenous people on over 360,000 acres of land.
About the food at each table:
Self-rated hunger according to the surveys has gone down to 6.6 percent compared to 12.7 percent just before I became president. We have a steady supply of rice at P16.00 per kilo for the poor.
And according to the diligent monitoring of Mar Roxas, our Secretary of Trade, since I became president, the value of mass sardines has remained at P8.50, wide neck oil at P11.00, long neck oil at P23.00. , P28.00 for white sugar, P23.00 for brown sugar, P28.00 for condensed milk, P115.00 for pork, P90.00 for chicken, and P160.00 for beef. These prices have been stable since I became president. As a result, we now have the lowest inflation rate in 20 years. Most likely, this is because my administration with the help of congress annually spends 20 billion pesos for the humanitarian modernization of agriculture.
We have distributed nearly half a million hectares under land reform. We can do more with the 38 billion pesos allocated for this by the Supreme Court's decision on the stolen wealth.
I congratulate the Supreme Court for finally granting what has taken much too long to materialize: authorizing the allocation and use of private loot for laudable public purposes.
I ask Congress to allocate a portion of this fund as compensation to the victims of human rights violations during Martial Law.
The government will also be able to help coconut farmers even more now that the coco levy case has been resolved in favor of the farmers. I will repeat what I said back in 2001, I will make sure that the beneficiaries of the coco levy are the small coconut farmers. I will not let them down.
I said that there could be a million new jobs in agriculture and fisheries. We have provided more than half of that number two-thirds into my term.
But to generate 1 million, we need to enact a proposal to use the farm as collateral for debt to pave the way for rural credit and capital. To the countless incentives that Congress has granted to business, I’ve matched similar programs to give a similar break to the worker in the factory and in the farm.
I do not subscribe to trickle down economics and social policy. Those who have less in life should not have to scramble for crumbs at the feet of those with too much on the table. As a liaison with the poorest of our country regarding our most serious problems, I visited unknown barangays.
My heart broke when I heard the Calisaan quadruplets had died. I am increasingly convinced to improve health services, as we have a good fight against SARS. Today, medicines often used by the poor are sold at half price in government hospitals.
In PhilHealth insurance, before I became president, one and a half million poor people were covered. Today, almost 7 million. I want to expand them, cheap medicine, and we should aspire that all the poor be covered by PhilHealth. And to finance the universal coverage of PhilHealth, I ask Congress to pass the bill on the indexation of sin taxes.
About the job:
I said in 2001 that in order for employment to increase, the climate for investment had to be adjusted. Our economy grew by 4.4 percent GNP last year and 5.6 percent in the first quarter of this year. Only China and Vietnam did better.
Poverty is gradually overcome. Self-rated poverty again according to the survey, is at its lowest percentage of the population in the last 16 years. Foreign investments rose 26 percent in the first quarter compared to the same period last year. But we need to reduce the risk of living, not to mention doing business here, which is why yesterday’s rogues must go to jail.
We can reduce business costs by providing basic infrastructure: roads, transport, and a more efficient and rationalized power sector. Our road program is symbolized by the long-awaited expansion of the North Expressway.
On mass transport, towards the end of this year, we will complete the loop of the light railway system of Metro Manila — from Santolan in Pasig towards Aurora Boulevard in Cubao, and on to Quiapo to Blumentritt on to EDSA in Pasay and back to Cubao . Fares have not increased since my first State of the Nation Address. So jeepney drivers, I’m grateful; I will not forsake you.
To reduce transport costs from Mindanao to Luzon, we set up the nautical highway, a system where the cargo truck itself travels straight to its destination, making inter-island crossings on ferries, rather than loading and unloading at every port. This has reduced by 30 percent the transport costs of products from Mindanao like copra, rice, corn, and vegetables.
We provided electricity to more than 3,600 barangays. While in Metro Manila, a consumer using 100 kilowatt hour paid P526.48 last May. Today, he pays P423.20, a drop of over 100 pesos or 20 percent. His case is one of almost 2 million households benefiting from the lifeline rate program of the Energy Regulatory Commission. Another 119 electric cooperative franchise areas will also soon reduce their rates under the loan condonation program of the Electric Power Reform Act that you, Congress, passed in 2001. That is why, believe me when I say that from having the second most expensive power in Asia Pacific, we now rank seventh.
But we will need 6,000 megawatts more of power over the next 10 years. That is why we need to pass the Transco Bill to maintain a favorable ranking as we take on this added capacity. When we reduce business costs, the last should be wages, and the first should be red tape.
So I make surprise visits to government offices, to stimulate those who are really trying and wake up who is sleeping at work. We have strengthened the national economy — agriculture, small businesses, housing — so that no matter what happens to the foreign economy, the Philippines will remain stable.
We have set aside 10 billion pesos for cheap loans to small businesses. It’s already used up, so we’re going to add more than 10 billion again.
Interest rates continue to fall. Good monetary policy and fiscal discipline and balance are the key. Our revenues surpassed the target by 21 billion pesos in the first five months of this year, driven by information technology, and helped by lifestyle checks, and 50 indictments and dismissals for graft and corruption. Thus, we held the budget deficit in check at 22 percent below ceiling.
I thank Congress for passing our e-Procurement Law because it helps us hold down expenditures. Now, I ask Congress to complete the passage of the bills on excise tax rationalization and the national revenue authority. But we must reduce corruption not only among appointive but also among elective officials.
With full financial support to my government, the registration, counting, and transmission of votes in the May 2004 elections will be completely computerized. Now, I ask congress to institute reforms in campaign finance to level the playing field and widen the choice of the electorate for worthy candidates. The strength of our investment climate also rests in great part on the realities of the global and regional environment and on how we turn those realities to our advantage.
Our country has come much closer to reattaining its strategic importance in geopolitics as an active and respected voice in international affairs. The Filipino is now recognized as a truly global worker, both at home and abroad. We have had the smallest number of strikes in the last 21 years. Increasingly, the Philippines is being recognized as an ideal site for critical operations requiring a high-quality, English-educated workforce. Eight million Filipinos live and work abroad, in jobs where they enjoy the unbeatable comparative advantages of an English-speaking education, advanced skills, and a uniquely caring nature.
The Filipino will work anywhere because he is not afraid. Like Manny Pacquiao, given the chance to compete, he will take it and he will win. It was only fitting that because of your work in Congress, overseas Filipino workers were given the overseas voting right. It was also fitting that I put in a new perspective on our relations with the United States, where three million Filipinos live and where I made a visit as their only state visitor for the year. The benefits of our engagement with the U.S. vastly outweigh any concerns about sovereign subordination. We should have the confidence to deal with other countries as equals — however rich, however strong, be they China, Japan, the members of the European Union or the United States.
We have reached out to good friends and neighbors — such as Prime Minister Mahathir of Malaysia and President Megawati of Indonesia — with the message that we must work together especially where democracy and security are concerned.
The presidency is always faced with serious problems. Terrorism, drugs, SARS, OFWs, Mindanao, poverty, corruption, investments, destabilization — these come to mind as we review the crises and opportunities of the past year. They sum up the problems we faced and the extraordinary responses that we made, surprising even ourselves and reviving faith in our future.
Barangay Vacante, Alcala, Pangasinan, got the SARS, took the hit, fought on, and valiantly overcame the crisis. Barangay Inug-ug, Pagalungan, Maguindanao, politely asked the MILF and the military to leave and take their fight elsewhere, thereby making their community a sanctuary of peace.
Sonny Ayao, renounced the war and became a community organizer even though he became an MNLF at the age of 12, and then became a Mujahideen for 27 years.
The Filipinos of Kuwait, isolated by war but refusing to abandon their jobs, took care of themselves and the people around them during the Iraq conflict. Teacher Josette Biyo of Iloilo, world champion in science and math teaching, has a planet in the solar system named after her. Luz Lozada, 72 years old, of San Isidro, Davao del Sur — appointed as a special farmer. She is the image model of hybrid rice technology, the symbol of our agricultural modernization. Police officers Cayetano Gannaban and Raul Graza fought off 20 rebels in a firefight in Quinapondan, Eastern Samar. Police Colonel Boysie Rosales, horrified by drug lords, refused a bribe of P35 million. I admire the elegance of many Filipinos, our deep ark of heroism and talent, our strong will to live, serve, and dominate.
Our dream is unshakable — a stable republic unshakable by selfish interests, flourishing with functioning institutions of government, serving an industrious tribe wherever it is needed to give them what they deserve.
A life of leadership is a difficult one, with few pauses for comfort and relief. These days, I find that rare moment of joy in the company of my family — especially my granddaughter, Mikaela. Just as I will do everything to make sure that the future will be kind to Mikaela and her generation, so must we all strive to turn our fears into a resolve to do right not just by ourselves, but by our children and grandchildren.
We are at war. war on terrorism. war against corruption. war against pain. war on drugs. war against destabilization. In our collective struggle and cooperation, we will prevail and win.
No agtutunos tayo ng agtrabaho, agba leygi tayo.
Abe-abeng makilaban ampon mag-obra, mangibabo tamu.
When we work together and overcome enemies, we will surely succeed.
As we engage in activities and fight, we are the ones who will prevail.
May God bless the Philippines.
Thanks to all of you.
